


As we know, Buddhism has a long history of more than 2,500 years.
In this long time, since the Buddha turned the Dharma Wheel and
then passed into nirvana, great masters in both Tibetan and Han
Buddhism have all attached great importance to the Heart Sutra,
the shortest scripture on the perfection of wisdom.

For example, the main doctrinal traditions of Tibetan Buddhism,
with the four great traditions of the Gelug, the Sakya, the Kagyu,
the Nyingma, as well as the Jonang, all attach great importance
to the Prajnaparamita-Hrdaya Sutra, commonly known as the Heart
Sutra. The Heart Sutra is an indispensable scripture in any master’s
repertoire of teachings and practices. Most Dharma practitioners
in Tibetan Buddhism adopt it in their collections of recitations and
chant it regularly, either early in the morning, late in the evening,
or at any other time.


                                                       10
In Tibetan people’s daily life, such as performing ceremonies for
the dead, in the rituals of consecrations, in the practice of animal
liberation, and even in building a new house, the Heart Sutra plays
an essential role. As long as one recites the Heart Sutra, the activity
as a whole will be successfully complete, and no adverse conditions
due to harmful demons will arise during the activity. The Heart
Sutra is often recited together with a supplemental section for
dokpa, the practice of averting harm and negativity.

This is also clear in Han Buddhism. Regardless of the Pure Land or
the Chan tradition, or the other traditions, all monasteries and all
eminent masters hold the Heart Sutra in the highest regard. This
scripture has long been commonly practiced in many traditions in
China.

Not only is it true in the regions where Mahayana ﬂourishes, the
Heart Sutra is also held in high regard everywhere else. The monks
of the Southern traditions of Buddhism in Thailand and Sri Lanka
also chant the Heart Sutra as their daily practice. Back to 1999, a Thai
master came to visit Larung Gar, and he told Khenpo Sodargye
that he carried the Heart Sutra in the collection of recitations with
him at all times.


                                                       11
Why Is It So Important?


Although the Heart Sutra is very short, compared with the Diamond
Sutra or other scriptures on the perfection of wisdom, why is it so
important and how did it come to receive such a consideration?

After the Buddha attained enlightenment, he turned the Dharma
Wheel of the teachings three times during a period of more than
forty years, explaining to living beings the eighty-four thousand
teachings. Among the three turnings of the Dharma Wheel, in the
ﬁrst the Buddha elucidated the teaching on the four noble truths
of suﬀering, origins, cessation, and the path; in the second turning
of the Dharma Wheel, the Buddha revealed the teachings on the
perfection of wisdom and emptiness; and during the third turning
of the Dharma Wheel, he disclosed the luminous nature of the
essence of the tathagatas.

In the Buddhadharma as a whole, the most profound and most
important of the three wheels of the teachings is the content of the


                                                       12
second wheel. But why is it the most important? Because it reveals
the true aspect of all phenomena and shows the path that the living
beings of the three realms must follow in order to attain liberation.
And the collection of all topics included in the second wheel of the
teachings is the entire set of the Prajnaparamita sutras.

When Buddha Shakyamuni was soon to enter nirvana, he passed on
the eighty-four thousand teachings to Ananda. He then solemnly
addressed him, declaring that, “I will not blame you if you forget
entirely, or if you damage completely, the eighty-four thousand
teachings, except for the perfection of wisdom. But if you misplace
a single line of the perfection of wisdom, I will hold you personally
responsible for it.” This passage illustrates how, setting apart the
perfection of wisdom, the eighty-four thousand teachings as a
whole are not as important in content as a single verse on the
perfection of wisdom.

The Prajnaparamita sutras are of three types, including the long,
middle, and short discourses on the perfection of wisdom. The long
Prajnaparamita sutra has one hundred thousand lines. The Tibetan
edition of the large Prajnaparamita sutra makes twelve heavy cases.
The middle Prajnaparamita sutra has twenty-ﬁve thousand lines;
and the short Prajnaparamita sutra has eight thousand lines.


                                                       13
If we condense the essential meaning of the Prajnaparamita sutras,
we obtain the Heart Sutra. So it is the essence, the heart, and
the core of the Buddhadharma. Put another way, the contents
of the Heart Sutra actually cover all the eighty-four thousand
teachings. It is the scripture whose text is the shortest and yet
whose doctrinal principles are the deepest and subtlest. Indeed,
it can be described as “a mustard seed containing Mount Meru”.
Just like modern technology enabling the compression of a large
amount of information into a tiny compact disc, the extremely
concise Heart Sutra condenses the essence of all Buddhadharma.
That’s why generations of scholars have held the Heart Sutra in
such an extraordinary consideration. It is the essence of the entire
Buddhadharma.

Our lifespan and energy are limited. Therefore, even if we wish
to study the eighty-four thousand teachings as a whole, we will
ﬁnd it impossible to know the entire Buddhadharma thoroughly
and with no obstructions. However, if we could grasp the main
points, we could then eﬀectively bring out the essentials. From this
perspective, to study the Heart Sutra is the wisest choice.


                                                       14
Who Are Able to Study the
Heart Sutra?


Certainly, to be able to meet this sublime teaching as a follower of
the Buddha is the result of the extensive accumulation of merit in
the past numerous eons. As it is said in Buddhist scriptures, anyone
who meets the Buddhadharma of the Mahayana must have formed
a subtle connection with the Buddha’s teaching in previous lives.
Lacking such a supreme connection, it will be utterly impossible
to hear a single word, or a line, of the teachings on the perfection
of wisdom even in dreams, let alone to reﬂect about them, or even
further, to engage in their practice. Therefore, we should develop a
mind of incomparable joy and care for this scripture.

In Longchenpa’s Treasury of Instructions, he stated, “Believing in and
hearing the Buddhadharma, feeling joy and performing eulogies,
as well as even slightly engaging in the correct teaching, sow the
seeds of liberation leading away from cyclic existence.” Anytime
one believes in and listens to Buddhist scriptures, rejoicing and

                                                       15
praising them, one accumulates immeasurable merits. Therefore,
whether or not you are Buddhist, if you chant the Heart Sutra
you will develop an auspicious connection with the teachings on
emptiness.

In Buddhist scriptures it is also said that anyone who learns about
emptiness must be someone who has great merit and wisdom.
Anyone who wishes to know whether one has a connection with
the teachings of emptiness, and whether the seed of emptiness has
already ripened in one’s mental continuum, can draw a conclusion
based on the feeling one has after hearing about it: if, having heard
the Heart Sutra, one has goose bumps, is moved to tears, and is
unable to control the joy in one’s heart, this proves that one has
had a connection with the teachings on emptiness in previous lives;
if not so, one was far removed from the teachings on emptiness.

There’re a famous story of Lord Atisha. Once two monks training in
the Southern traditions of Buddhism came to Atisha on account of
his reputation in order to request the transmission of the teachings
from him. To begin, Atisha taught them the teaching of the four
noble truths and the view of selﬂessness of persons. In hearing the
teachings, the two monks were so happy that their face covered
in smiles, and repeatedly nodded their head in agreement. Atisha
then taught them the selﬂessness of phenomena and the contents
of the Heart Sutra. Who would have imagined that, after hearing

                                                       16
these teachings, they became terriﬁed, and promptly begged Atisha
to stop, saying: “Great sage! Great master! Please stop teaching us,
you’re frightening us!” Later on, despite further requests, Atisha
ignored them. Eventually, the two monks had no choice but to
cover their ears and leave.

Deeply moved, Atisha then said: “Merely receiving and keeping
the pure vows of the basic vehicle bears no great signiﬁcance,
for one should listen extensively and expand one’s learning. In
particular, one should understand the Prajnaparamita sutras. If not
so, in no way will one understand the Buddha’s perfect wisdom.”

In general, as one becomes familiar with the Buddha’s teaching,
it is rather easy to accept the teachings of the vehicles of humans
and gods such as “virtue has a pleasant reward, non-virtue has
a non-pleasant reward”. In studying the profound teachings on
emptiness in such scriptures as the Heart Sutra, it is necessary to
have a sense of one’s capacity. The same principles that apply to
the Great Perfection also apply to the teachings on emptiness of
the perfection of wisdom. If you are unable to accept them, not
only will they be of any beneﬁt, but they could also harm you.
Everyone must treat this issue with caution, and with conscientious
introspection, to ensure that one is a suitable vessel to listen and
practice the teachings on emptiness. But, as Khenpo Sodargye said,
everyone in the audience must already have a connection with the

                                                       17
teachings on emptiness. If not so, one would not be able to hear
about the Heart Sutra at all.


                                                       18
How to Study the                Heart Sutra?


The Heart Sutra touches upon many ideas concerning the conven-
tional aspect of phenomena and the ultimate aspect of reality. If
one genuinely wishes to understand these ideas, not only must one
become proﬁcient in the meanings implied in the long, middle,
and short scriptures on the perfection of wisdom, there are still
two texts that one must study: the one is the Abhidharmakosa (A
Treasury of Abhidharma) and the other is the Root Verses on the Middle
Way. With no prior study of these two works, we will be unable
to grasp the contents of the perfection of wisdom, for many of its
ideas cannot be explained clearly in only a few words.

In the Abhidharmakosa we can learn about such concepts as the ﬁve
aggregates, the twelve sense bases, the eighteen constituents, the
twelve links of dependent origination, and the four noble truths;
but still, we will not ascertain the emptiness of these notions. After
Buddha Shakyamuni passed into ﬁnal nirvana, Nagarjuna was the
great scholar who, as prophesied by the Buddha himself in quite a


                                                       19
few scriptures, gathered and elucidated the Prajnaparamita sutras.
The most important of Nagarjuna’s works is the Root Verses on the
Middle Way.

Moreover, the works that comment and explain this text and its
underlying intention are the works by Nagarjuna’s direct disci-
ple—Acharya Aryadeva’s  Four Hundred Stanzas, together with
Acharya Chandrakirti’s Prasannapada (Clear Words) and Madhya-
makavatara (Entrance into the Middle Way). Through the study of
such Madhyamika works, we will be able to understand that all
of the aforementioned concepts are empty. Once we have laid this
foundation, learning the contents of the Heart Sutra will become
an easy and smooth task.

However, because of the limitations imposed by our teaching
schedule, we’re unable to follow a thorough commentary on the
profound and vast meanings of the Heart Sutra. Here we will only
touch on the main points, commenting on the exterior meanings
in a simple and cursory way: while certain neophytes will sow
the seed of wisdom, everyone will be able to understand the main
topics covered therein.


                                                       20
About the Different Versions
of the      Heart Sutra


There are diﬀerent versions of the Heart Sutra. Despite minor vari-
ations concerning the name of each translation, and despite slight
diﬀerences in the texts, the main points remain fundamentally the
same. The focus of the debate on the diﬀerence concerns only the
opening and the closing portions of the translations. The transla-
tion by Xuanzang lack these two portions, which are included in
other translations. Some believe that the translation by Xuanzang
are inconsistent. So they discredit this shorter version, and believe
that it is not coherent. Still others believe on the contrary that the
textual editions lacking coherence are the longer versions with the
opening and closing portions.

Indeed, we should trust both shorter version and longer versions,
for the two types are not mutually exclusive, and we need not
chose one and reject the other. Based on reliable historical records,
the most popular and most authoritative Heart Sutra in the Tibetan

                                                       21
language was translated directly into Tibetan from Sanskrit. Its
translator Vimalamitra is an extraordinary translator, also one of
the great lineage masters of the Great Perfection in the Nyingma
tradition.

There could be three reasons that Xuanzang’s translation diﬀers
from other translations. First, it might be due to diﬀerences in the
original Sanskrit texts. Second, it is possible that the teaching spo-
ken by the Buddha is somewhat diﬀerent when heard by diﬀerent
living beings. For example, when the Buddha set forth the wheel of
the teaching at Vulture Peak, about one hundred thousand of his
disciples were present. While each disciple possessed the Dharani
of not forgetting, nonetheless each perceived a teaching that was
not exactly the same. The Buddha proclaims diﬀerent teachings
because he can address the diﬀerent interests and predispositions
of living beings.

The third reason is that the Sanskrit version originally employed by
Xuanzang should have been given to him directly by Bodhisattva
Avalokiteshvara. It is mentioned in the story of Xuanzang retrieving
Buddhist scriptures in India.

At the very beginning, when Xuanzang left for India to study
the Buddhadharma, he had a large following. Later, however, he
remained alone. When he approached the great desert, having


                                                       22
overturned his water ﬂask, he lost direction, so that he and his
horse were unable to proceed as they fainted from thirst. For four
nights and ﬁve days in a row, Xuanzang did not ingest a single
drop of water. He simply dropped dead on the desert, and chanted
the name of Avalokiteshvara, until, the ﬁfth night, the old horse
perceived the smell of water plants in the gusting breeze. Only then
was Xuanzang able to ﬁnd his way out of this diﬃcult situation.

Once he passed by a monastery. At that very moment, he happened
to hear someone cry out loud. As he came closer to take a look, he
found out that the person who cried was a monk whose entire body
was covered in blisters (just like leprosy today). Xuanzang was
fully aware of the length of his journey, still, as he saw this destitute
monk, he did not hasten on with his journey. Instead, he remained
in the monastery to cure him. Later, only when the monk fully
recovered from illness, did Xuanzang bid farewell and proceed
further. As Xuanzang was about to leave, in order to express his
gratitude, the monk gave him a Sanskrit scripture as a gift. That
very scripture was the celebrated Heart Sutra.

On the road, Xuanzang would always read this sutra, especially
when he met with adverse conditions and obstacles. As long as
he recited the sutra, any adverse condition or obstacle would
immediately and completely fade away.


                                                       23
The amazing thing is that along the route of his return from India,
Xuanzang arranged things so that he could repay the kindness
of the monk who had given him  the Heart Sutra. Who would
have thought that, as he reached the place where the monastery
was then located, not only the monk but also the monastery had
vanished without a trace.

It is said that the elderly monk was Avalokiteshvara, who then
manifested as a monk in order to personally give Xuanzang the
Sanskrit manuscript of the Heart Sutra. This statement stands to
reason, for Avalokiteshvara’s power is inconceivable. In addition,
the Heart Sutra takes shape through a dialogue empowered by
Buddha Shakyamuni between Shariputra and Avalokiteshvara.
Moreover, in the sutra itself all topics are entirely proclaimed
by Avalokiteshvara. There is also a chance that Avalokiteshvara
manifested as a monk in order to give Xuanzang the Sanskrit
version of the Heart Sutra.

Therefore, the Heart Sutra translated by Xuanzang is the most
powerful. If one wishes to chant it, one can do so relying entirely
upon Xuanzang’s translation. But in providing a commentary to
others, or when we want to thoroughly understand the meaning
of the Heart Sutra, it is also admissible to have the version with the
opening and closing portions added.


                                                       24
The Sublime Blessings of the
Heart Sutra


In Tibetan Buddhism, there is such a tradition that if certain adverse
conditions come up, people will chant the Heart Sutra to get rid
of them. For those senior monastics or elder practitioners, when
meeting with greatly diﬃcult situations, such as earthquakes or
severe disasters, they will chant the Heart Sutra. In particularly, on
the 29th day of the twelfth month of the Tibetan lunar calendar,
everyone will chant the Heart Sutra’s dokpa liturgy of averting
harm and negativity, with the auspices to avoid all hindrances
from evil spirits during the coming year by relying on the power
of emptiness from the Heart Sutra.

If we habitually carry the Heart Sutra with us, and if we perform
oﬀerings to it at our shrining room, due to the power and blessing
of emptiness from the Prajnaparamita, we will be able to get rid of
all negative conditions. Or even if we place it by our pillow when
we sleep, we won’t have nightmares.

                                                       25
Some may wonder, what is the power of blessing? Simply put,
what we call the power of blessing is certain kind of power that
has obviously beneﬁcial eﬀects to us, yet cannot be seen with our
naked eye, for it is immaterial.

There are many things that cannot be seen with the naked eye
while having practical beneﬁts. For example, medicine has the
power to cure, electricity has the power to charge, and, in a similar
way, anything has a kind of force and power. The blessings of the
Heart Sutra come from the power of emptiness, the power of the
Buddha, the power of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, as well
as the power of ultimate truth, and, in addition, the power of
the conﬁdence that we have in the Heart Sutra. Especially when
we have such conﬁdence, together with all the other conditions
gathering together, we can certainly be blessed by the incredible
power and get rid of all kinds of harm caused by evil spirits and
others. The power of the blessings is indeed inconceivable.

In those sutras talking about the merits of emptiness, it is often said
that if one carries with oneself a scripture that teaches emptiness,
such as the Heart Sutra, any living being who touches the scripture
directly or indirectly, for example, being touched by the wind that
brushes against the scripture, will not fall into the three lower
realms; likewise, if these sources of the teachings are carried with
a person, then any other being who touches or drinks this person’s

                                                       26
bathing water will not fall into the three lower realms; and anyone
who chants the Heart Sutra, those beings who hear his or her voice,
even when quarrelling with others, will also not fall into the three
lower realms. Certainly, this is not to say that such beings will be
able to immediately attain liberation; nevertheless, the blessings
from the scriptures on emptiness are inconceivable and have great
power to protect those beings from being suﬀered in the lower
realms.

Since we know that the merits of the teachings on emptiness are
quite inconceivable, we should have conﬁdence in this. If we meet
with adverse conditions, hardship or any form of suﬀering during
our practice, as Khenpo Sodargye suggested, we should try to
abide on the meaning of emptiness and then chant the Heart Sutra,
in this way we can overcome any kind of obscurations.


                                                       27
Opening
The Title of the Sutra


The Title of the Sutra

   IN SANSKRIT:
   Bhagavati Prajna Paramita Hridaya Sutra

   IN ENGLISH:
   The Blessed Mother, the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom

The full title of the Heart Sutra is Bhagavati Prajna Paramita Hridaya
Sutra, which means The Blessed Mother, the Heart of the Perfection
of Wisdom. Here Bhagavati, the Blessed Mother, is the appositive of
Prajna Paramita, or in other words, Prajna Paramita is described as
Bhagavati, the Blessed Mother.

The literal meaning of Prajnaparamita is “wisdom gone to the other
shore”. But the term prajna resists the translation as “wisdom.”
In Han Buddhism, it was not translated directly as wisdom, but
simply maintained its transliteration as “bo re”, because the term


                                                       29
wisdom only partially explains the meaning of prajna, and does not
express the profound implications of the term entirely. Similarly,
in Tibetan Buddhism, according to King Trisong Detsen’s request,
all the titles of the Prajnaparamita sutras were left in Sanskrit.
The Meaning of     Bhagavati

Bhagavati is the one who has achieved enlightenment, or buddha-
hood. This term refers not to a physically existing person, but rather
to the absolute state of Prajnaparamita itself. The term Bhagavati
has the connotation of “mother”, or it is considered as feminine
because, through realization of her own nature, Prajnaparamita,
she gives birth to the buddhas of the three times, and thus is the
mother of the so-called “Four Noble Children”: shravakas, pratyek-
abuddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas. Or to put it in a simple way,
Prajnaparamita is considered as the mother of all noble beings.

Buddha Shakyamuni, teaching elsewhere in the Prajnaparamita,
says that “those people who would become shravakas must learn
to practice the Prajnaparamita; those who aspire to be a pratyek-
abuddha must learn and practice the Prajnaparamita; those who
would achieve bodhisattva realization must learn and practice the
Prajnaparamita; and those who would accomplish buddhahood
must learn and practice the Prajnaparamita.”


                                                       30
The Meaning of     Prajna Paramita

Prajna means supreme wisdom. In Sanskrit pra means supreme
or highest, and jna means knowledge or wisdom. It is supreme
wisdom because what it knows or understands is the meaning of
our true, absolute nature, and there is no meaning or knowledge
higher than this.

Paramita means beyond, or gone to the other shore. It also can
be translated as perfection in some contexts. So what is the other
shore? From a worldly perspective, when someone has completed
the goal of one’s task, one can be said to have reached the other
shore. In this context, “the other shore” indicates nirvana, whereas
“this shore” indicates samsara. Living beings are drowning in the
ocean of the three realms of cyclic existence, ever unable to emerge.
Therefore, they are on this shore of the ocean of suﬀering. But the
liberation of nirvana is beyond the ocean of cyclic existence. Hence,
it is called the other shore. Only the Buddha has crossed to the
other shore, and no one else in the world has gone to the other
shore. All the living beings of the three realms are wandering in
the ocean of suﬀering that is cyclic existence, still relatively distant
from the other shore.

Regardless of an expertise, a globally renowned scientist, or a
philosopher, or a thinker reputed for profound erudition, one can


                                                       31
only be proﬁcient in the knowledge of a certain worldly ﬁeld. There
is still a great diﬀerence between the wisdom of the Buddha, who
is omniscient, and the knowledge of such individuals. And even
with the wisdom of an arhat, they will not have reached the other
shore, since they have only realized the selﬂessness of persons,
but not have destroyed the rest part of emotional obscurations
and cognitive obscurations, which are caused by the grasping
at a personal ego (self of the individual) and the grasping at
phenomena as truly existent (self of phenomena) respectively. So
the other shore is the shore beyond all extremes where supreme
and perfect wisdom will awaken us.

1 The Classiﬁcation of Prajnaparamita

It is well known that Prajnaparamita, the perfection of wisdom,
divides into four kinds: (1) the textual perfection of wisdom, namely
the textual Prajnaparamita, such as the long, the middle, and the
short Prajnaparamita sutras; (2) the foundational Prajnaparamita,
or the natural Prajnaparamita, which is emptiness, the foundation
of all things; (3) the path Prajnaparamita, that is, the ﬁve paths, the
path of accumulation, the path of joining, the path of seeing, the
path of meditation, and the path of no-more-learning; and (4) the
resultant Prajnaparamita, the wisdom of the Buddha.


                                                       32
The four types of Prajnaparamita can also divide into expressing
wisdom  Prajnaparamita and expressed Prajnaparamita. The ex-
pressed Prajnaparamita is of three kinds, namely foundational or
natural Prajnaparamita, path Prajnaparamita, and resultant Prajna-
paramita. The entity of all phenomena that is beyond conceptual
elaboration is foundational Prajnaparamita. The Buddha perfectly
understands the truth of all phenomena that is beyond conceptual
elaboration, and this wisdom is resultant Prajnaparamita. How
does the Buddha realize the truth and achieve this wisdom? It is
by relying on the path Prajnaparamita, which is the wisdom of the
ﬁve paths.

What, then, is the expressing Prajnaparamita? It is the textual Praj-
naparamita that superbly teaches the meaning of the perfection of
wisdom. The textual Prajnaparamita can also divide into (1) the tex-
tual Prajnaparamita of the sutras and (2) the textual Prajnaparamita
of the commentaries or shastras. The textual Prajnaparamita of the
sutras is the entire set of the Prajnaparamita sutras. The textual
Prajnaparamita of the commentaries includes treatises such as the
Entrance into the Middle Way and the Four Hundred Stanzas on the
Middle Way. The Heart Sutra belongs to the category of the textual
Prajnaparamita of the sutras.


                                                       33
2 The Classiﬁcation of Wisdom

Indeed, the mere term “wisdom” also has diﬀerent meanings,
including worldly wisdom, transcendental wisdom and unsur-
passable wisdom.

Worldly wisdom means any kind of ability of mastering a worldly
technique, a project, or a discipline. As worldly people put it, it
is to be clever and quick-witted and endowed with a profound
erudition. In evaluating things by worldly standards, we can say
that worldly sages such as literati, scientists, and physicists possess
certain wisdom. However, from a transcendental perspective, that
is, from the perspective of transcendental wisdom, they cannot be
regarded as sages, since worldly wisdom is not ultimate. Worldly
people have four distortions: (1) seeing what is impermanent as
permanent; (2) seeing what is suﬀering as happiness; (3) seeing
what lacks a self as having a self; (4) seeing what is impure as
pure.

Transcendental wisdom indicates the wisdom of the enlightened
beings such as hearers and bodhisattvas, those who understand
the four Dharma seals: (1) all that is conditioned is impermanent;
(2) anything in cyclic existence is suﬀering; (3) all phenomena are
empty and devoid of self; and (4) nirvana is peace.


                                                       34
Unsurpassable wisdom is the wisdom of the Buddha. Because the
Buddha has perfectly realized the selﬂessness of persons and the
selﬂessness of phenomena, he has perfectly understood the reality
of all things. The perfection of wisdom in the Heart Sutra indicates
this unsurpassable wisdom, so it is called Prajnaparamita.
The Meaning of     Hridaya

Hridaya means the heart, in this case signifying essence or core. The
quintessence of the Buddha’s teaching in its entirety is condensed
in the Heart Sutra. According to historical records, in more than
forty years during which Buddha Shakyamuni turned the wheel
of the teaching, he taught the emptiness of the prajnaparamita for
about twenty-two years. The Heart Sutra contains the quintessence
of the teachings that the Buddha dispensed in those twenty-two
years. This sutra lies at the heart of all these teachings. Therefore,
among the vast corpus of the prajnaparamita sutras, this text is the
pith, a concise presentation of the teachings elaborated upon in
the rest of the prajnaparamita sutras.

Hridaya also refers to the distilled, essential message of this teaching
itself, called the view. It is the view of the perfection of wisdom,
pretty simple and direct, and recognizing the pure essence of
emptiness.


                                                       35
The Meaning of     Sutra

The Sanskrit term sutra literally means a chain, a thread, or a
continuum. Here it means something that was heard from some-
one else and usually connotes a discourse. In Buddhism, it has
many classiﬁcations. For example, one classiﬁcation refers to the
scriptures authorized by the Buddha, another to the scriptures
empowered by the Buddha, yet another to the scriptures spoken by
the Buddha in person, and so on. The main contents of the Heart
Sutra are classiﬁed under the scriptures empowered by the Buddha,
for the Buddha, while absorbed in the concentration called the
apprehension of the profound, spoke this sutra by empowering
Avalokiteshvara.

Setting aside the instructions taught personally by the Buddha, the
instructions spoken by certain special ﬁgures can also be called
sutra. For example, although the Platform Sutra, highly esteemed
in the Chan tradition, is not a scripture spoken by the Buddha,
its contents diﬀer in no respect from those of a genuine scripture,
thereby later generations also called it sutra. However, according
to rule in Tibetan Buddhism, only the contents personally spoken,
empowered, or authorized by the Buddha can be called sutra.

The foregoing explains the title of the Heart Sutra. As practitioners,
we’d better study this scripture carefully and thoroughly, chanting


                                                       36
it and memorizing it in our daily practice. In this way, we will be
able to destroy any adverse condition or obstacle that arises in our
practice. In terms of its otherworldly qualities, the signiﬁcance and
the merit of the recitation of the Heart Sutra are quite remarkable
because it gathers the essentials of emptiness into a single core.

Certainly, we must not expect to attain enlightenment all at once,
and to achieve perfect understanding in one or two days of re-
ﬂection. Still, if we engage listening, reﬂection, and meditation in
a consistent way, ignorance and aﬄictions will get weaker and
weaker in our mental continuum, while at the same time wisdom
will get stronger and stronger. For the time being, we will be unable
to soar freely in the vast space of the true reality of emptiness, yet
in terms of view we should be able to eliminate all kinds of doubts
and mistakes through leaning and reﬂecting, and set up a brand
new and correct view. It is evident how education in Buddhism
is a form of education to wisdom. Certain types of reasoning
might be diﬃcult to accept at the very beginning. Yet only through
systematic reﬂection and discussion can we thoroughly eliminate
doubt and eventually bring wisdom to perfection.


                                                       37
Six Perfection


A1. The Origin of the Teaching
B1. Six Perfections

   Thus have I heard, at one time, the Exalted One was residing
   on Vulture Mountain in Rajgriha, together with an assembly
   of great monks and bodhisattvas, the great beings.

Thus have I heard, [...]

This statement “Thus have I heard” is the opening of all Buddhist
sutras. Prior to entering ﬁnal nirvana, as he replied to Ananda’s
questions, Buddha Shakyamuni established this custom: when the
Buddha’s instructions are compiled into textual form as scriptures
it is necessary to add this statement. The goal is to warn the
compiler that it is necessary to record the scriptures from an
objective standpoint, without making changes according to one’s
own ideas and through one’s own initiative. With this statement,


                                                       38
it is helpful for later generations to develop sincere faith towards
the Buddhist sutras.

The term “thus” expresses the perfection of the teaching. At the
setting of the teaching, Buddha Shakyamuni empowered Aval-
okiteshvara to speak the main contents of the Heart Sutra, and so
all the contents expressed in the sutra are entirely the Buddha’s
word. “Thus”, I have recorded the scripture truthfully, coherently
and unmistakenly, just as the Buddha has spoken, without adding
or removing anything.

The word “I” refers to the compiler, the bodhisattva Vajrapani. As
is well known, Buddha Shakyamuni turned the second Dharma
Wheel at Vulture Peak, later compiled into scriptures by ten thou-
sand bodhisattvas including Manjushri and Maitreya. Among
these bodhisattvas, Vajrapani was the main compiler of the Prajna-
paramita sutras. It is just like the written summary of a worldly
meeting, with the following statement: “Such and such is what I
have heard during the meeting.” Hence, “Thus have I heard” are
the words spoken by the compiler, the bodhisattva Vajrapani.

The term “heard” can be interpreted in two ways. Certain com-
mentators believe it means that one has merely heard but not
understood, for the meaning of emptiness taught by the Buddha is
hard to grasp. For this reason, Vajrapani would have meant: “I have


                                                       39
merely heard the Buddha’s teaching simply on a literal level, but I
have not yet understood the subject matter.” However, Taranata of
the Jonang tradition regarded this interpretation to be untenable.
It is not certain that, at the time of hearing, Vajrapani would have
completely lacked any understanding of the subject matter. It is
also a possibility that he had a partial understanding.

[...] at one time, the Exalted One was residing on Vulture Moun-
tain in Rajgriha, [...]

“At one time” means during one time. But why, here, is not
a speciﬁc time mentioned? Because the Buddha’s miraculous
transformations are countless. In front of diﬀerent living beings, at
times the Buddha manifests to teach as if it were summer, while
at other times he manifests to teach as if it were winter. This is
also the reason that there are so many diﬀerent interpretations in
diﬀerent historical records concerning the time of the Buddha’s
passing into ﬁnal nirvana.

If the Buddha were a common being, then it could have been said,
“During a certain year, in a certain month, and in a certain day,
and at this hour and minute and second, while staying at a certain
teaching hall, he began to give a certain teaching.” Hence it would
have been possible to express a speciﬁc time with a degree of


                                                       40
certainty. But here, from a wider perspective, the meaning is: “At
one time, when causes and conditions were ripe.”

“The Exalted One” is Bhagavat in Sanskrit. The meaning is “En-
dowed with Transcendence, Ownership, and Destruction”. Tran-
scendence means “reaching beyond the extremes of samsara and
nirvana”. Ownership means “possessing the merits of the six
paramitas”. Destruction means “eliminating the four types of
mara”, that is, defeating the mara of the aggregates, the mara
of aﬄictions, the mara of death, and the deity Mara. Only the
Buddha is perfectly endowed with the qualities of “Transcendence,
Ownership, and Destruction”.

“was residing on Vulture Mountain in Rajgriha”: The Buddha
was staying on Vulture Mountain nearby the city of Rajgriha.

Rajgriha, the capital of the ancient state of Magadha, was one of
the great cities in India back to that time. There are about eighteen
kilometers between Rajgriha and the Nalanda monastic university.
The Buddha stayed in Rajgriha for rather long periods. And during
these periods, Ananda, Mahakasyapa, and Mahamaudgalyayana,
took refuge in the Buddha right there in Rajgriha.

Vulture Mountain is one of the main sites where the Buddha turned
the second wheel of the teaching. As he once approached Vulture
Mountain, Tsangyang Gyatso, the renowned Sixth Dalai Lama,

                                                       41
then perceived the Prajnaparamita sutras all over the mountain,
and so he dared not climb on top. In 1990, when His Holiness
Jigme Phuntsok Rinpoche approached Vulture Mountain, he said,
“Back then, Tsangyang Gyatso dared not climb the mountain, but
this time we must go.” So the people then followed His Holiness to
climb the mountain. As they reached the top, they paid homage to
the platform where the Buddha turned the Wheel of the Dharma,
to the caves of Mahakasyapa and Mahamaudgalyayana, as well as
to the other holy sites at the very top.

[...] together with an assembly of great monks and bodhisattvas,
the great beings.

At that time, the retinue of followers who received the teachings
was made of “an assembly of great monks” for the common vehicle,
and of “bodhisattvas, the great beings” for the Mahayana.

According to some commentators, the expression “great monks”
does not refer to common monks, but to those monks who have
attained the resultant state of arhat; and the expression “bod-
hisattvas, the great beings” refers here to the bodhisattvas who
have realized the ultimate truth. Common bodhisattvas—the bod-
hisattvas who have merely generated the conventional aspiration
to awakening, as well as certain monks who have received the


                                                       42
common monastic vows, are not the actual retinue to whom the
Buddha is imparting the teaching here.

For the term of bodhisattva, bodhi means “enlightened, awak-
ened”, freed from the obscurations of dualistic and conceptual
thinking. Sattva means “courageous being”. The enlightened be-
ings, the bodhisattvas, must be courageous because they no longer
exist merely for themselves and their family and friends. They
dedicate the entire activities of this body, speech and mind to
bringing joy and happiness to all sentient beings as limitless in
number as space itself.

Arhat is a Sanskrit word meaning “one who subdues or destroys
enemies”. This does not refer to an external, physically existent
enemy, but rather is a metaphor referring to the inner enemies of
ego-clinging, the emotions, and their concomitant obscurations.
An arhat has completely uprooted these enemies.

“Together with” means to be complete together. The aim of this
multitude of monks and bodhisattvas altogether is to meet the
Buddha, attain enlightenment, and beneﬁt living beings.

Thus, the foregoing text included in the prologue conveys the six
kinds of perfections: “Thus” is the perfection of the teaching; “I
have heard” is the perfection of the compiler; “at one time” is
the perfection of time; “the Exalted One” is the perfection of the

                                                       43
root teacher; “was residing on Vulture Mountain in Rajgriha” is
the perfection of the setting; “together with an assembly of great
monks and bodhisattvas, the great beings” is the perfection of
retinue.

In general, most scriptures include these six types of perfections.
It is just like the written summary of a worldly meeting, where
certain key elements such as the time, the location, the host, the
participating members, the rapporteur, and the meeting outline,
are all indicated.


                                                       44
The Background to the
Occurrence


B2. The Background to the Occurrence

   At that time, the Exalted One was absorbed in a concentra-
   tion on the discernment of things called the “apprehension
   of the profound”.

   Also, at that time, Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva, the
   great being, as he engaged the profound perfection of wis-
   dom, clearly perceived that the ﬁve aggregates are empty of
   inherent existence.

When all conditions including the time, the root teacher, the retinue,
and the teaching, were present, the Exalted One entered into a
deep concentration, that is, he entered into a meditative absorption
called the “apprehension of the profound”.


                                                       45
Why is it called profound? Because ordinary arhats, common be-
ings, and non-Buddhists, are fundamentally unable to apprehend
the reality of all things, which is beyond all conceptual elabora-
tions. This realm of reality is unfathomable, and so it is called
profound.

Apprehension: This profound realm is perceived clearly and com-
pletely by the Buddha’s individual apprehension, therefore this
type of absorption is said to be profound and luminous.

The expression discernment of things refers to many diﬀerent
kinds of elements, such as the ﬁve aggregates, the twelve sense
bases, and the eighteen constituents, which, on the ultimate level,
are beyond all conceptual elaborations, while manifest like dreams
and illusions on the relative level.

We should understand that the state of a buddha has no distinctions
between absorbing into or emerging from a concentration. Here,
by saying that the Buddha absorbed into a concentration, it means
that in front of the ordinary beings, the Buddha’s material body
seemed to absorb into, and emerge from concentration.

Also, at that time [...]

As the entire retinue was on site, the Buddha had already absorbed
into the profound concentration.


                                                       46
Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva, the great being, [...]

These three terms refer to the great bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. In
Chandrakirti’s Entrance into the Middle Way, the term bodhisattva
is explained as follows: only the beings who have attained the ﬁrst
bodhisattva level and above can be called bodhisattvas. The term
great being, mahasattva in Sanskrit, refers to the great bodhisattvas.
In general, only the bodhisattvas who abide on the three pure
levels (that is, the eighth, the ninth, and the tenth bodhisattva
level) can be called great bodhisattvas. But why are they called
“great”? It is because the bodhisattvas who abide on these three
levels possess extensive compassion, wisdom, and power, and they
can engage the vast teachings of the Mahayana, since they are able
to conquer all kinds of demons.

[...] as he engaged the profound perfection of wisdom, [...]

This statement illustrates how, amid the entire retinue, the bod-
hisattva Avalokiteshvara practiced the perfection of wisdom. The
term engage has several meanings. Generally speaking, activities
such as reading or listening to the perfection of wisdom are all
forms of engaging the perfection of wisdom. Here it means that
when the Buddha entered into the deep concentration, the bod-
hisattva Avalokiteshvara also absorbed into his meditation on the
perfection of wisdom, inspired by the power of the Buddha.


                                                       47
[...] clearly perceived that the ﬁve aggregates are empty of inherent
existence.

At this time, Avalokiteshvara clearly perceived that the ﬁve aggre-
gates are entirely empty of inherent existence. All compounded
things or phenomena are encapsulated among the ﬁve aggregates.
The term “ﬁve aggregates” means the gathering together of form,
feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness, which
conceals the true nature of things. The ﬁrst of the ﬁve aggregates
is the aggregate of forms, followed in turn by the aggregate of
feelings, the aggregate of perceptions, the aggregate of mental
formations, and the aggregate of consciousness.

The meaning of this statement is that the bodhisattva Avalokitesh-
vara saw with the utmost clarity that all compounded things are
empty of inherent existence. The expression “clearly perceive” has
diﬀerent meanings:

For ordinary beings, clear perception is to observe through the
modes of generally characterized and of self-characterized objects.
For example, we can engage observation of the statement “the
ﬁve aggregates are empty” by means of analytical reasoning.
Thus, it is by means of conceptual discrimination that we come to
observe with clarity that the ﬁve aggregates are empty of inherent
existence.


                                                       48
For hearers and solitary buddhas, clear perception is the under-
standing that the ﬁve aggregates are the principal and secondary
causes of suﬀering, and that the ﬁve aggregates are both suﬀer-
ing and its origin. Hence, by means of the reasoning concerning
the selﬂessness of a person, they clearly perceive that the ﬁve
aggregates are empty of inherent existence.

For buddhas and bodhisattvas, clear perception is the consummate
perception of the ﬁve aggregates as empty of inherent existence
through the mode of both the selﬂessness of a thing and the
selﬂessness of a person. Hence, the degree to which they perceive
the emptiness of the ﬁve aggregates is the most perfected.

The phrase beyond all suﬀering is lacking in the Tibetan trans-
lation, while several Chinese translations including Xuanzang’s
translation have this statement. So it’s better for us to know this and
have a brief explanation of it. The literal meaning of this statement
is “transcending, surpassing all suﬀering”. According to the Ab-
hidharmakosa, suﬀering divides into three types: (1) suﬀering upon
suﬀering, (2) suﬀering of change, and (3) all-pervasive suﬀering of
conditioning. By absorbing into the meditation on the perfection
of wisdom, the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara transcends all kinds
of suﬀering. This is exactly the power of Prajnaparamita.


                                                       49
Summary: The Buddha’s Silence and the Main
Figures

Thus, in the foregoing we have explained the opening portion of
this sutra, namely the causes and conditions by which the Heart
Sura came about. Here, the most important of these is the Buddha’s
absorption into meditation. If the Buddha had not absorbed into
meditation, Avalokiteshvara would have been unable to absorb into
his meditation on wisdom, and Shariputra would have also been
unable to ask his question. According to several great commentaries
of ancient India, the main conditions that brought about the Heart
Sutra were: (1) the power of the Buddha’s meditative absorption;
and (2) the fact that Avalokiteshvara engaged the prajnaparamita
through the Buddha’s empowerment, and that, as a result, he
clearly perceived that the ﬁve aggregates are empty.

Generally speaking, there are said to be three principal kinds of
scriptures attributed to the Buddha: those words that are actually
spoken by the Buddha himself, those words spoken by a bod-
hisattva or a disciple on behalf of the Buddha, and those words
spoken by disciples or bodhisattvas that were directly inspired
by the Buddha. While this preliminary section of the Heart Sutra
pertaining to the context of the origin of its teaching belongs to
the second category, the main body of the text belongs to the third
category.

                                                       50
Some might then ask, why Avalokiteshvara is the main ﬁgure in the
Buddha’s retinue? According to some commentators, Avalokitesh-
vara was at that time the main person in charge of the assembly,
thereby Shariputra addressed his question to him.

According to another interpretation, because the subject matter
of this scripture is compassion and emptiness, by means of his
miraculous powers the Buddha clearly perceived that, if spoken
by Avalokiteshvara, the teaching would have brought beneﬁt to
endless living beings. Therefore, the Buddha would have inten-
tionally empowered Avalokiteshvara to engage the perfection
of wisdom, and to clearly perceive that the ﬁve aggregates are
emptiness. Likewise, having received the Buddha’s empowerment,
Shariputra would have thus intentionally raised the question to
Avalokiteshvara.

From this, we see that there are three main ﬁgures in the Heart Sutra,
and that the Buddha is the most important of them. In the whole
interaction, ultimately the Buddha says only one sentence, and all
the other contents, including the foundation, path, and resulting
state as a whole, are entirely taught in Shariputra’s question and in
Avalokiteshvara’s answer. Regardless, it is the Buddha who asks all
questions as he empowers Shariputra, and who speaks all teachings
while absorbed in meditation as he empowers Avalokiteshvara.


                                                       51
Main Text
The Question


A2. Main Text
B1. The Question and the Answer
C1. Bring up the Question

   Then, the venerable Shariputra, by the power of the Bud-
   dha, said to the bodhisattva, the great being, the noble Aval-
   okiteshvara, “If a son or daughter of noble qualities wishes
   to practice the profound perfection of wisdom, how should
   he then train?”

When the Buddha absorbed into meditation, Shariputra was there
on the setting of the teaching. By the force of the Buddha’s mighty
miraculous powers, Shariputra then stood up, joined the palms
of his hands, and respectfully addressed the bodhisattva Aval-
okiteshvara, saying, “If a son of noble qualities wishes to practice
the profound perfection of wisdom, how should he then practice
it?”


                                                       53
Then: In that very moment. Right then, the entire retinue was
at the setting of the teachings and the Buddha absorbed into his
profound samadhi. It is the very moment when, empowered by
the Buddha, the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara also practiced the
perfection of wisdom, and clearly perceived that the ﬁve aggregates
are empty.

If Avalokiteshvara had not clearly perceived that the ﬁve aggregates
are empty, he would have had no reason to explain to Shariputra
what he then saw. Therefore, we should be aware of the importance
of our own practice or realization of the Dharma teachings. Based
on listening and reﬂecting, we have to take the ﬁnal step of prac-
ticing, and only through practicing and meditating by ourselves,
can we really absorb the teaching into our own mind stream and
achieve the corresponding realization on our own.

The venerable Shariputra
                       : Venerable, or ayus.mat in Sanskrit, is an
honoriﬁc form of address. It is just like the forms of address that
we use when we often say “great abbot”, “eminent”, or “elder”.

Here the name Shariputra refers to one of the Buddha’s ten great
disciples, who manifested as an arhat. Following the Indian custom,
because the name of Shariputra’s mother was Sari, based on
his mother’s name he was in turn named “son of Sari”, that is,
Shariputra.


                                                       54
In this sutra, it is Shariputra who addresses questions to Aval-
okiteshvara. No ordinary being is capable of asking questions of
this kind. In his appearance, Shariputra is an arhat, yet according
to several commentators he is actually a bodhisattva. His wisdom
is the foremost among all of the Buddha’s disciples.

Because the Heart Sutra is the condensed version of the Prajna-
paramita sutras, prajna is its subject matter, therefore it is meant to
develop the practitioners’ wisdom. In this view, it was exclusively
congruous with the main point of the scripture to have Shariputra,
the foremost in wisdom, step to the fore. This is just like many
other scriptures, such as the Diamond Sutra, in which among all
disciples, the Buddha addresses Subhuti, the “foremost in the
understanding of emptiness”. In the case of the Heart Sutra, if one
did not possess certain level of wisdom, it was impossible to raise
profound questions concerning emptiness.

By the power of the Buddha: Even as the foremost of the arhats,
he would still need the Buddha’s empowerment, in order to be
able to ask the profound questions about emptiness. Otherwise, it
would be relatively hard for anyone to ask even a single, profound
question about emptiness.

Son or daughter of noble qualities: Literally it means sons or
daughters of the lineage, or of the family, which in general, can


                                                       55
be understood to mean someone who has awakened to his or her
buddha nature, the innate potential for enlightenment. In this
sutra, this terms particularly refers to practitioners who have deep
admiration for the spiritual practices as embodied in the six per-
fections, and whose mind is gripped by the powerful compassion
that aspires to liberate all sentient beings from suﬀering. Or to
put it simply, it refers to an individual whose spiritual inclination
toward the bodhisattva path has been awakened.

In sum, the general meaning of this passage is that, at that time,
by the power of the Buddha, Shariputra asked the bodhisattva
Avalokiteshvara a question: “There are many beings in the world
who wish to practice the perfection of wisdom, but they ﬁnd it
diﬃcult, and so, if a son or a daughter of noble qualities genuinely
wishes to practice the Prajnaparamita, and to train in the emptiness
of the Prajnaparamita, how should he or she practice, how should
he or she train?”


                                                       56
The Answer


C2. Answer the Question
D1. A Brief Instruction on How to Practice Prajnaparamita

   As these words were spoken, Avalokiteshvara, the bodhi-
   sattva, the great being, replied to the venerable Shariputra,
   saying, “If a son or a daughter of noble qualities wishes to
   train in the practice of the profound perfection of wisdom,
   he or she should observe that the ﬁve aggregates are empty
   of inherent existence in this way.

By the power of the Buddha, the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara then
provided an answer to this question. In this world, if there are
sons or daughters of noble qualities, who wish to practice the
profound Prajnaparamita, they should contemplate it by way of
the ﬁve aggregates being empty.

In certain scriptures of deﬁnitive teaching, it is asserted that,
although Avalokiteshvara has become a buddha a long time ago,

                                                       57
abiding in countless worlds with the appearance of a buddha
to help living beings, he just appears by the side of Buddha
Shakyamuni as a bodhisattva for the sake of living beings.

The receptacle world, and the world of sentient beings are both
collected in the ﬁve aggregates. Similarly, the twelve faculties, the
eighteen constituents, the twelve links of dependent origination,
can be all summarized by the ﬁve aggregates. Therefore, the ﬁve
aggregates contain everything.

Here the sutra tells us that, regardless of whether one practices
the six perfections, or any other teaching, one should practice by
way of contemplating the emptiness of inherent existence. In other
words, one should reﬂect as follows: in ultimate truth, everything
is beyond all conceptual elaborations, and beyond all linguistic
distinctions; whereas in relative truth, everything is like an illusion,
a dream, a bubble, a shadow. This is the fundamental way to
contemplate the emptiness of inherent existence.

In his commentary on the Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way,
Ju Mipham Rinpoche says, “The method to contemplate the Pra-
jnaparamita is, in ultimate truth, to practice by way of taking
everything as empty space, beyond all grasping, and beyond
all conceptual elaborations; and, in relative truth, to practice by


                                                       58
way of taking everything as both appearing and lacking inherent
existence.”
The Practice of the   Heart Sutra

Why did the Buddha manifest himself in meditative absorption in
order to teach this sutra? We can say that the Buddha’s implication
here is to point out that we must contemplate on the Prajna-
paramita’s teaching on emptiness. Lacking such contemplation, we
will be unable to attain any realization.

The meditation practice of the Heart Sutra is extremely important.
But if we do not understand it, the whole thing will only amount
to a daily memorization of the Heart Sutra. It will be a mere verbal
recitation, and its actual eﬃcacy will not be as great as we should
expect. Therefore, when we engage recitation, we must also engage
reﬂection and we must put the teaching into practice.

As Khenpo Sodargye said in his teaching, the Heart Sutra’s teaching
on emptiness is extremely rare to meet during millions of cosmic
ages and we are indeed lucky to have met with this teaching.
Therefore, we should leave everything else to the side as much as
we can, and try to ﬁnd more time to contemplate on the sutra’s
contents.


                                                       59
So in brief, everyone should practice the Prajnaparamita, no matter
if one is a son or a daughter of noble qualities. But how do we
practice? It is by holding the view that the ﬁve aggregates are empty.
As for us ordinary beings, we apprehend that the ﬁve aggregates
including forms, feelings, perceptions, etc., are empty of inherent
existence by means of conceptual thought; after we realize the
selﬂessness of persons and the selﬂessness of phenomena, we then
clearly perceive that the ﬁve aggregates are empty by means of the
actual realization of the two selﬂessnesses.

Indeed, it should be within our reach, as ordinary beings, to
hold our practice by means of the view that the ﬁve aggregates
are empty. For example, when we perform prostrations or recite
mantras, we should understand that, in relative truth, such illusory
and dream-like forms of merit accumulation are really existent and
indispensable; and in ultimate truth, however, they are beyond
conceptual elaboration, just like empty space, which is immaculate
and undeﬁled.

If we engage practice with this view, we will gradually let go of
the grasping to the ﬁve aggregates, in which we so often become
involved in daily life. Eventually, we will be able to thoroughly
eliminate our conception of a self. And if we eliminate our concep-
tion of a self, the grasping to the ﬁve aggregates linked with the


                                                       60
conception of a self will dissolve naturally. To practice in this way
is the fundamental practice of the Heart Sutra.


                                                       61
The Foundational
Prajnaparamita


D2. An Extensive Elaboration on Prajnaparamita

In this part, we will comment extensively on the themes of the
Prajnaparamita from the three aspects, which are the foundational
Prajnaparamita, the path Prajnaparamita, and the resultant Pra-
jnaparamita. We can include all things among the categories of
foundation, path, and result. In practice, we should ﬁrst ascertain
the foundation of all things; next, the engagement of this founda-
tion is the practice of the path; and further, as the path is crossed,
we ﬁnally reach the culminating position, and this is the result.
Indeed, when we explain the Great Perfection, the Mahamudra, or
just the essential points of the Sutrayana, we always do so from the
perspective of the foundation, the path, and the result. It is quite
important for practitioners to establish and to gain knowledge of
the foundation, the path, and the result.


                                                       62
In this part, Avalokiteshvara ﬁrst discusses the emptiness of the
foundation elements, such as the ﬁve aggregates, the twelve sense
bases, and the eighteen constituents. He then discusses the empti-
ness of the path elements, such the twelve links of dependent
origination, and the four noble truths. Finally, moving on to the
elements of the result, he elucidates the emptiness of the Buddha’s
wisdom.
The Five Aggregates

Because we are seeking to perceive both the appearances of ﬁve
aggregates and their emptiness, it is important to understand what
the ﬁve aggregates are and how they are empty. This is one of the
Heart Sutra’s main points.

According to Abhidharmakosha, whatever exists in this phenomenal
world can be condensed into two groups: compounded things
and uncompounded things. Nothing whatsoever falls outside
these two categories. The ﬁve aggregates belong to the category of
compounded things, and in fact include them all.

Aggregate is called skandha in Sanskrit, means that many things
piled together, not just a single and independent thing. The ﬁve
aggregates are the aggregate of forms, feelings, perceptions, mental
formations and consciousness.


                                                       63
1 The Aggregate of Forms

Forms include the ﬁve sense faculties and their objects, as well
as a slightly more problematic category called invisible form, or
invisible materiality, which we won’t go into here.

The sense faculties are not the ordinary sense organs, such as our
eyes and ears and so on, but subtle forms within the sense organs.
They have particular shapes which are described very precisely in
Abhidharma.

The objects of the eyes, visual forms, means the various colors and
shapes that appear to our eyes. They may be pleasant, unpleasant
or neutral.

The objects of the ears, sounds, may occur naturally or be man-
made, or a combination of the two. A lot of sounds are just
meaningless noise, but some impart meaning, for example, the
sublime, liberating message of the Dharma. As with sights, sounds
can be pleasant, unpleasant or neutral.

The objects of the noses, smells or odors can be natural or artiﬁcial,
and once again, pleasant, unpleasant or neutral.

The objects of the tongues, tastes are said to be of six kinds, roughly
translated as sweet, sour, bitter, hot, astringent and pungent.


                                                       64
The objects of the bodies, textures, or tactile sensations, may be
felt on the body’s surface or in its interior. Interior textures include
hunger and thirst, and the feelings that come with being ill or
deeply relaxed.

So generally, the aggregate of forms includes all that we can see,
hear, smell, taste and touch, and also the subtle faculties that do
the seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching.

2 The Aggregate of Feelings

Here feelings do not mean emotional feelings, but something
more like sensations. There are the painful, pleasant and neutral
sensations in the body and the pleasant, unpleasant and neutral
sensations in the mind. Feelings are important because they are the
basis for desire and aversion. We like to have happy, pleasurable
feelings, and we reject feelings of sadness. So it conditions our
mental states and determines what we experience in the end.

3 The Aggregate of Perceptions

Perception means the apprehension of a speciﬁc object, as circum-
scribed and distinct from something else. It is deﬁned as “that
which grasps or identiﬁes characteristics”. Perception could be non-
conceptual, in the case of the ﬁve physical senses, or conceptual,
as in the perception of thoughts and ideas.


                                                       65
The ﬁve non-conceptual sense perceptions are regarded as dis-
cerning when they are operating normally and perceiving their
proper objects: colors & shapes, sounds, smells, tastes and textures.
Mental perception is said to be discerning when it distinguishes
identities or names. This happens when (a) mind recognizes an
object and associates it with its name, and (b) the mind knows
what is referred to when a name is given.

4 The Aggregate of Mental Formations

It basically refers to thoughts and emotions, or what are technically
referred to as the mental states. Although there are many possible
mental states, the Abhidharma teachings speak of ﬁfty-one, which
are held to be particularly important.

Sensation and perception are actually included in these ﬁfty-one
mental states, but are treated separately in the list of the ﬁve
aggregates because they are especially noticeable.

5 The Aggregate of Consciousness

According to the Mind-Only school, there are eight types of con-
sciousness. The ﬁrst ﬁve types are the consciousness of the ﬁve
senses (seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching), which are
non-conceptual, and the sixth one is the consciousness of mental


                                                       66
objects, like thoughts, ideas and emotions. The seventh is the de-
ﬁled mental consciousness and the eighth is alaya consciousness,
or all-ground consciousness.

The deﬁled mental consciousness is closely connected with the ego
and is where the notion of “I” and “mine” enters into experience.
It is absent in the meditation of noble beings, but never ceases in
the mind stream of an ordinary being.

The alaya consciousness is described as a storehouse, in which
we keep all our habits and instincts, the imprints or seeds of our
actions which will ripen into future experiences.

To summarize, the ﬁve aggregates of form, feeling, perception,
mental formations and consciousness are compounded and inter-
dependent things. None of them is a solid or single entity, but
is rather a combination of many things. We never exist for one
moment outside of these ﬁve aggregates. They are the foundation
of samsara, the enablers of our clinging and attachment. They are
also, however, the key to our enlightenment, for it is only by our
understanding of them, by our gaining a clear picture of what they
are and how they function, enlightenment can become present in
our mind stream.


                                                       67
E1. The Natural Prajnaparamita
F1. The Emptiness of Five Aggregates
G1. The Emptiness of Form

   Form is emptiness; emptiness is form. Form is not other than
   emptiness; emptiness is not other than form.

These four sentences teach the emptiness of the ﬁve aggregates,
which can be regarded as the heart of the Heart Sutra. The meaning
of this passage is that material forms are emptiness, and that
emptiness is material forms; there are no material forms beyond
emptiness, and there is no emptiness beyond material forms. This
is the Heart Sutra’s main point and its essence. If we can gain a
genuine understanding of the non-duality of form and emptiness,
then the other themes of the Heart Sutra, such as the remaining four
aggregates, the twelve sense bases, the eighteen constituents, the
twelve links of dependent origination, and the four noble truths,
can be ascertained by the same method.

Beginners always feel perplexed in this regard, for they ﬁnd this
perspective to be contradictory. How can the very things that I
myself see and feel, such as, for example, this microphone or this
cup, be emptiness? And how about this empty space in front of
me, how can it be inseparable from form? This is impossible! If my


                                                       68
teacup is emptiness, then how can it contain tea? It is certainly not
emptiness.

Those who propound this view have not understood the doctrinal
principle of emptiness in Buddhism. From beginningless time, we
have believed that the real world is simply the things around us
that we can see or feel, and emptiness are those that we cannot see
or feel. Yet, in reality, it is not so. If we analyze, all phenomena in
this world are devoid of an inherent existence, and as long as the
intrinsic nature of one thing is nonexistent, it is emptiness.

Some might engage the following thought: “Since everything
is empty, we must not grasp to anything, we must give up on
everything, and so there is nothing at all that we must do.” It
is indeed not so. The emptiness that is taught in Buddhism is
the emptiness of nature and not the emptiness of characteristics.
Buddhism never denies the appearance of all phenomena. To us
deluded beings, the characteristics of appearance are deﬁnitely
existent. Appearance, however, is not separate from emptiness, and
emptiness is also not separate from appearance. Appearance and
emptiness are both actually a single entity. This, in turn, is called
the emptiness of nature in dependent origination.


                                                       69
Two Metaphors of Emptiness

In the commentary on the Heart Sutra by Taranatha, the great
Tibetan master of the Jonang tradition, there is a simile that aptly
illustrates this issue. To the eyes of a person aﬀected by jaundice,
a white conch appears as yellow, so yellow is the color that this
person sees at that very moment. Yet, in truth, the white conch
is not yellow at all, and there is absolutely no yellow color in the
conch. Only to the eyes of a person aﬀected by jaundice, it appears
as yellow, because that person is unable to see the white conch.
In reality, the white color is merely the true aspect of the conch.
Therefore, we can say: To those people whose eyes are damaged,
the white conch is simply yellow, and the yellow conch is simply
white. The yellow conch will not be other than the white conch,
and likewise the white conch will not be other than the yellow
conch.

Similarly, emptiness can be compared to the white conch, and
the yellow conch can be compared to the material things that we
perceive. Just like the white color is the original nature of the
conch, emptiness is the real nature of all material things. The
material things that we perceive in this very moment, whether a
teacup, a bottle, or a pillar, all have a color, a shape, the quality of
obstructiveness, and exist as discrete solid appearances. In reality,
however, at the right moment they appear in this way, they are

                                                       70
emptiness. The perceptions of all buddhas and bodhisattvas is
such an unobstructed, great, luminous emptiness. Moreover, this
great, luminous emptiness is not separate from appearance.

The commentary on the Heart Sutra by Rongton Mawe Senge, and
the Trilogy on Rest by Longchenpa, both take the analogy of the
reﬂection of the moon in the water to refer to emptiness. The
moon in the water is emptiness, and emptiness is the moon in
the water. Emptiness is not diﬀerent from the moon in the water,
and the moon in the water is not diﬀerent from emptiness. In this
regard, the Buddha emphasized that appearances that we perceive
are actually not separate from emptiness; they are just like the
reﬂection of the moon in the water, or the appearance in a dream.
From this perspective, since all phenomena are devoid of inherent
existence, we say they are emptiness.
Cut the Attachment to the Four Extremes

According to the doctrine of the Middle Way, we can also ascertain
this statement through the negation of the four extremes, which
are existence, non-existence, both existence and non-existence,
and neither existence nor non-existence. These four extremes are
respectively the grasping of common beings and non-Buddhists,
the grasping of hearers and solitary buddhas, and the grasping of
bodhisattvas.


                                                       71
1 Form Is Emptiness

The reason why the text says “form is emptiness” is that ordinary
beings grasp to existence, that is, we have strong attachment to
material things, and regard all objects as truly existent. In this
regard, what the Buddha is telling us is: “Ordinary beings believe
in truly existent things such as the bottle and the pillar, while in
fact these things are not separate from emptiness, so one must not
grasp to the material characteristics of external objects.” This is the
refutation of the extreme of existence.

For us ordinary beings, even though we might make a great eﬀort
during an entire lifetime, in the end our pains will come to nothing,
and our deeds will rather follow us in our future lives, and there we
will receive their reward, as we will be subjected to the suﬀerings
of cyclic existence. The root cause of all these suﬀerings is our
ignorance, or the lack of the knowledge that everything does not
truly exist but is just a rainbow-like appearance that we can never
grasp. Due to our ignorance, we have this wrong perception that
everything is a solid and permanent entity, just like the person
aﬀected by jaundice seeing the while conch as yellow. So once we
have this wrong perception, we develop the wrong view, and then
based on the wrong view, all our actions only become the cause
of suﬀering and aﬄictions, and in turn, the cause of the endless
journey in samsara.

                                                       72
2 Emptiness Is Form

The reason why the text says “emptiness is form” is that hears
and solitary buddhas regard the emptiness in the selﬂessness of
persons as truly existent, or their nirvana as truly existent. Thus,
they have a grasping to this emptiness. “Emptiness is form” can be
employed to refute their assertion. The emptiness in the selﬂessness
of persons is actually not separate from material forms, for material
things are also referents for purity and luminosity. Such state of
purity and luminosity is not completely nonexistent. The extreme
of nonexistence, in which hearers and solitary buddhas engage, is
thus refuted.

In sum, when we see a cup, which seems to be solidly existent, the
appearance of this cup is exactly emptiness. It has no true material
entity. This is the meaning of “form is emptiness”. Yet, although
it has no true material entity, the cup can still contain tea, for it
is not absolutely and merely empty, or the so-called nothingness.
This is the meaning of “emptiness is form”.

When the Middle Way engages analysis by the reasoning of the
vajra-splinter or by the reasoning that refutes production of the
existent and of the non-existent, material forms are entirely nonex-
istent, and yet it is in this very nonexistence that everything can
become manifest. We should not understand these statements in


                                                       73
the wrong way that initially this cup is existent, but after having
engaged analysis, it has then become empty. Indeed, it is empty at
the very moment it contains water; and it can contain water while
it is empty.

“Form is emptiness” reﬂects the fundamental empty nature of all
form. “Emptiness is form” is the appreciation of interdependent
origination. From the coming together of causes and conditions
arise—from emptiness—all the beautiful forms, feelings, and per-
ceptions that we experience, which are the appearance of this
phenomenal world. It is the beauty of emptiness that allows all
forms to arise, not as singular entities or things, but as the coming
together of forms.

3 Form Is Not Other than Emptiness

The third and the fourth verses, “form is not other than empti-
ness, emptiness is not other than form”, were spoken for certain
bodhisattvas, because they still retain a subtle grasping to the
two extremes of “both existence and non-existence” and “neither
existence nor nonexistence”.

Certain bodhisattvas see form and emptiness as two contrasting
things. If it is form, it cannot be empty, and if it is empty, it cannot
be form. Although the text says “form is emptiness, emptiness is
form”, they might still feel as if these are two things that exist there

                                                       74
in a uniﬁed state, both existence and non-existence forged together
somehow. Indeed, all phenomena are fundamentally the perfectly
unobstructed non-duality of form and emptiness. Therefore, in
order to refute the bodhisattva’s grasping to these two conceptions,
the Buddha said, “form is not other than emptiness.” Form and
emptiness are not two separate entities. They are perfectly uniﬁed,
without the slightest duality.

In the third statement, the Buddha intends to free us from the
concept that there are both existence and non-existence, since it is
not the ultimate level of truth, but still a level of clinging and ﬁxation
to the idea that there are two diﬀerent, independent entities which
are joined. In the state free from all extreme concepts, emptiness
and form have always existed intimately as one. So “form is not
other than emptiness” is really presenting the logic of the union
of emptiness and appearance.

4 Emptiness Is Not Other than Form

Once having the understanding that the ideas of existence and
non-existence are faulty and extreme, we can simply know that
the ideas that existence and non-existence do not exist is still an
extreme position. Therefore, the ﬁnal statement tells us that we
should transcend the grasping to the conceptions that there is
neither existence not non-existence. These four statements are able


                                                       75
to subvert our ability to hold onto any position or extreme, and
then we are cut loose from the cycle of dualistic concepts to rest
in the state of emptiness. Thus we know that the actual state of
emptiness is beyond all conceptual thoughts and elaborations.
The Reality of Forms

According to the teaching on buddha nature, we can have deeper
understanding on the true reality of forms. The real forms are the
forms of buddha nature, or the realm of reality. For us ordinary
beings, we cannot see it, because it pertains to the realm of buddhas
and bodhisattvas. This is comparable to the white conch, which
can only be seen by individuals whose eyes are not damaged by
jaundice. Those whose eyes are damaged will not see the white
conch. All they will see is the yellow conch.

However, in either case, we should be aware of that, emptiness is
not mere nothingness, but the entity of the realm of reality which
is luminous and free from conceptual elaboration. So the conch
can also serve as an analogy for the inexpressible realm of reality.
For diﬀerent individuals, it appears diﬀerently, but regardless of
whether one’s eyes are or are not aﬀected, that which is seen is
just a conch. Likewise, regardless of appearances, the entity of all
things is the realm of reality, which is luminous and free from
conceptual elaboration.


                                                       76
So the luminous and nonconceptual entity of the realm of reality is
truly existent. But the way of existence is not established by means
of the conceptual mind of us ordinary beings, such as reﬂection on
shape and color, or through linguistic expression. In contrast, it
exists in a way that entirely transcends language and reﬂection, a
way that cannot be expressed.

Some may wonder, how   can everything appear in emptiness?
Indeed, this is the capability of our own buddha nature. All kinds
of appearance pertain to the subtle workings of the mind, or in
other words, anything can become manifested by the subtle powers
of the mind.

Ju Mipham Rinpoche’s The Lion Roar: A Commentary on the Essence of
the Tathagatas and other commentaries by great masters investigated
one particular question: whether exterior, insentient things, possess
the essence of the tathagatas. Indeed, insentient things are but one
subtle aspects of the essence of the tathagatas, because insentient
things are also one manifestation of the mind. The fundamental
nature of the mind is emptiness, and within the emptiness of the
mind, such material forms can indeed be manifested.
Non-existence from the Scientiﬁc Point of View

Anyone who has studied Physics, or who has some knowledge of
Quantum Mechanics, is aware of the following: All matter that is

                                                       77
visible to the eye is composed of molecules; molecules subdivide
into atoms; atoms subdivide into electrons and the atomic nucleus;
the atomic nucleus subdivides into protons and neutrons; these,
then, divide into the even smaller quarks; and after quarks we still
have subquarks. Today, we know that below subquarks there is a
quantum ﬁeld.

So in the theory of Quantum Mechanics, we have the convertibility
of mass and energy: any matter, such as a bottle, or a pillar, is
convertible into energy. In other words, everything, including the
very earth that sustains our existence, and our very ﬂesh and body,
is convertible into energy.

But what is this quantum ﬁeld or energy ﬁeld? It is space-like
energy that cannot be seen or touched. Put another way, all there
is behind any idea concerning matter is only a ﬁeld. Beyond this
ﬁeld, there is nothing real. For example, when we look at this cup,
this cup is made of energy. Therefore, it does not possess a physical
entity that is obstructive and real. This energy is not obtained
through conversion. Energy is simply simultaneous with material
existence.

Therefore, even when we engage analysis from the perspective
of physics, we reach the conclusion that, ultimately, whether a
bottle, an atom, or a quark, anything cannot truly exist. As the


                                                       78
fundamental entity of things is nonexistent, how can things not be
emptiness? This point of view is much closer to that of Buddhism.
Certainly, from a Buddhist perspective, this view is not an ultimate
view, because Quantum Physicists still grasp onto the real existence
of a ﬁeld, and so they fall far short from a Buddhist position.

Some might ask, “Scientists engaged a step-by-step analysis of
matter with scientiﬁc equipment, and then reached the conclusion
of quantum  ﬁeld. How does Buddhism  ascertain emptiness?”
We can say that the modes through which Buddhism ascertains
emptiness are quite numerous, each with its own beneﬁts. Of these,
a simple method whose logic is rather similar to that of Physics is
to engage analysis, as earlier in the method of Physics, of the coarse
substance of, say, a bottle. Then, when we reach down to the level
of energy, which contemporary Physics cannot analyze in more
detail, we take a step further and ascertain emptiness through
methods such as the great reasoning of dependent origination,
and the reasoning that refutes production from the existent and
from the nonexistent.

For example, take the following questions: “How is energy pro-
duced?” “Is it energy that was previously existent and that is
produced again, or is it energy that is produced and that was
previously completely nonexistent?” In the case of the former,
we incur in the error of unnecessary production, since energy

                                                       79
was already existent. In the case of the latter, we ask again: “Is
this energy produced by causes and conditions, or is it produced
without a cause?”

If it is produced without a cause, we incur the error of endless
production. If it is produced by causes and conditions, then, because
a result is produced by a cause, if the cause and result are related,
then the causal element exists at the same time with the result
element. And, since the result element is already existent, it is
unnecessary for it to be produced again. But if cause and result
are not related, then how can the causal element have a function
in the production of the result element? Eventually, through a
series of deductions, this thing we know as energy also vanishes
without a trace, becoming something that it is only possible to
imagine thanks to our conceptual thoughts, but which, in reality,
is something that is completely nonexistent.

Buddhism  surpasses science also in so far as the statements of
Quantum Physics are scientiﬁc ﬁndings that common people are
both unable to experiment and to infer directly. In contrast, the
Buddha does not ask anyone in the world to accept the “ﬁndings”
of his realization. He takes a step further. He helps ordinary beings
to directly infer his conclusions on emptiness by means of logical
reasonings that are accessible to all. Moreover, if one wishes to take
a step further, to put the Buddha’s teaching into practice, he or she

                                                       80
can experience directly the realm of emptiness that the Buddha
himself realized.
The Illusion of the Self

From the foregoing reasoning we realize that our eyes perceive the
substance of diﬀerent kinds of forms. And yet, when we track the
essence of this substance, we end up with empty hands. When we
do not examine it, the bottle seems like to exist; but if we examine
it in detail, we realize that the so called bottle actually does not
exist.

Again, let us take this building as an example. We believe this is a
real and indivisible house. Yet in truth it is made of many kinds
of building materials. There is no essence of the house apart from
a pile of building materials. Can you recognize which, among
the broken pieces of such building materials, is the house? It is
impossible.

Many of us may think, “I am sitting here, taking a class.” But
indeed, we overlook one gap in this logic. Ultimately speaking,
where is what the so called the “I”? Is it in our body, or is it outside?
Most people will answer by saying: “It is certainly in my body,
for it cannot be outside.” We then go on and ask: “Given that it is
within your body, in what part of your body is it, is it in the head,
in the torso, in the four limbs, or is in some other place?” Many of

                                                       81
us know that there are people who are deprived of the four limbs
are still alive.

If we believe that what we call the “I” is in our brains or in our hearts,
we can then further analyze the brain and the heart. Eventually,
after we search for it in each part through our analysis, we will be
unable to ﬁnd the place where this “I” exists. Perhaps, some will
say, even though it is impossible to ﬁnd it in any part of the body,
we still have a soul, and that will be the so called “I”.

But what is this soul? Essentially, it is nothing but an idea or a
concept. We can analyze such an idea or concept on account of the
length of time, and again it can be analyzed down to emptiness. We
can say, without exaggeration, that no matter what we regard as an
“I”, the reasonings of the Middle Way can refute it completely.

There is another reason that we can realize the emptiness of all
things: if all things were truly existent, their entities would be ﬁxed
and unchanging, yet it is not so in reality. Take, for example, sound
itself. Some people will regard a sound as pleasant and melodious,
whereas other will regard it as unpleasant and unreﬁned. Take a
bottle of wine for example. Those who like to drink will see its
coloring as translucent and penetrating, will feel as if its fragrance
is aromatic and long-lasting, its ﬂavor rich and refreshing, the
sound of it being poured into a glass the jingling of silver threads,


                                                       82
and the feeling of it being ingested and reaching the stomach
comparable to walking among clouds. It can truthfully be called a
manifold wonder for color, sound, smell, taste, and touch. But to
those who are allergic to alcohol, or who do not enjoy drinking, all
such sensations are basically impossible to ﬁnd, for it is spicy and
pungent to smell, bitter and piercing to drink, and as soon as it gets
into the stomach after ingestion it makes one sick. No matter what,
there will be no wonderful feeling. If this wine was something
that is truly existent, it would only possess a ﬁxed essence. Yet,
in reality, it accommodates diﬀerent opinions, for everyone has a
diﬀerent view on how he or she feels about it.

These reasonings illustrate that both the “I” and external objects do
not exist as real essences, and are beyond such artiﬁcial entities. It is
only through their conceptual minds that people apprehend such
illusions as an “I” or as external objects. The truth of emptiness
will emerge only as we get rid of these deceiving semblances by
means of the Buddhist doctrine.
Ordinary Beings’ Perceptions

We cannot decide if things are existent or nonexistent only on
the basis of our own perception, because our sense organs are
essentially mistaken. For example, if you deem something as
existent on account of your eyes being able to see it, and to be


                                                       83
simply nonexistent on account of your being unable to see it, then,
what would you say of all matter that we cannot see with the
naked eye, such as the X rays, the ultraviolet rays, the infrared rays,
molecules, atoms, neutrons, protons, and electrons, and the very air
that we generally regard as completely empty, but which contains
particles and elements such as nitrogen and oxygen? Would you
still say they are all nonexistent?

Also, we normally regard a table as something that is still and
immobile. Yet, in reality, each and every atom that forms the table
is in constant ﬂux.

Take, as a further example, something we dream of during sleep
that we can both see and touch. In a dream, when we eat we can eat
with satisfaction, when we climb a mountain we can get drenched
in sweat, when a tiger devours us we will cry out in great pain.
Still, does this mean that dream states are truly existent?

You might then say, “Dream sensations are blurry, while upon
waking perceptions are clearer; dream events are constantly and
incessantly changing, with no logic, whereas real events are rather
stable, and understandable according to logic; sooner or later
people wake from dreams, while after they are awake they cannot
further awaken.”


                                                       84
But sometimes you may have had a kind of dream where sensations
are particularly clear, and the dream state is so realistic to the degree
that you cannot say that you are dreaming, because you believe
that everything in the dream is real. So, how can you tell whether
your entire life, the life you experience during the waking state,
is not such a dream, the one that has been going on for a longer
time?

In truth, in most dreams we actually do not know we are dreaming,
and we ﬁnd out it was a dream only upon waking. Likewise, could
it be that we do not know that our waking life is a dream, perhaps,
only because we have not yet awakened from this great dream?
In principle, what is the real diﬀerence between dreams and the
waking state? Indeed, any time we wake up from a dream, we can
ask the same question to ourselves: “How do I determine whether
what I have just experienced was a dream, or whether what I am
now experiencing is a dream?”

The fact that in a dream we might be aware of nonexistent things
as existent, illustrates that our sensations are very unreliable. Thus,
the self that we are aware of during the waking state, together with
the world that surrounds us, might also be an illusory perception,
a dream-like illusion.


                                                       85
That our sensations are mistaken is proven by countless facts.
Everything in the universe, from the sun, the moon, and the stars,
up to all plants, insects, and ﬁsh, every single thing is the mere
appearance of form, and the only truth behind the appearance of
form is emptiness.

In Buddhist scriptures, there is such an example. If, on a moonless
night, you light an incense stick, and if you draw a circle in the
air with it, you will see a shining circle, yet we all know that in
reality there is no circle such as a wheel in the air, but only a piece
of incense, which was lit is now being turned around in circles.
Because our eyes lack the power to distinguish it, all we see in
its place is a wheel. The Buddha called such a circle the “wheel
of spinning ﬁre”, which in reality is nonexistent. He employed
this phenomenon to characterize the appearances apprehended by
common people, which are nothing but their delusion.
Appearance within Emptiness

To be sure, the Buddha never negated conventional phenomena,
for he would never say, “This cup is empty, therefore it cannot be
utilized to contain tea.” These phenomena can all be established in
mistaken and illusory perception. However, these phenomena are
not unlike the images that we see in dreams. Although we can see
them and touch them, they cannot stand for the real existence of


                                                       86
such dream realms. Or else, these phenomena can be likened to
the moon in water. Although it appears to be like the real moon,
yet in truth it is only a reﬂection, a mere mistaken perception.

Why do these phenomena exist? It is the function of dependent
origination. When causes and conditions gather together, incon-
ceivable things will manifest. The truth of dependent origination
is profound, and it would be somewhat hard to understand it all at
once. However, if we study a few extra works in the Middle Way,
and if we engage practice according to the view explained there,
we will eventually understand its profound meaning.

It should be clear that, when we talk about emptiness, “empty”
does not refer to the empty space in and outside a bottle. This
is comparable to an actor with outstanding performing skills.
Although he or she can change all kinds of diﬀerent makeups and
costumes, and he or she can play all kinds of diﬀerent roles, it
will still be him or her, no matter what, for he or she will not have
changed because of a diﬀerent costume, or because of a diﬀerent
role. “Emptiness” is like this, too. Regardless of the diﬀerent
expressions of emptiness, its fundamental nature is constant and
unchanging.


                                                       87
The Two Truths

To have a better understanding of the connection between our
perceptions of this phenomenal world and its true reality, we
need to talk about the theory of the two truths, relative truth and
absolute truth.

Everything has an absolute aspect, or absolute truth, and a relative
aspect, or relative truth. The absolute or ultimate truth is about
the inherent nature of everything, how things really are. The
conventional or relative truth is about how things appear. We
ordinary people may perceive sort of relative truth, that is, the
relative world in all its diversity, through our everyday use of mind
and our sense faculties. We do not usually consider the objects
of our senses, what we see, hear, taste, smell, and touch, to be
devoid of intrinsic existence. The everyday world is something
we consider to be absolutely, independently existing. However,
it is only through rigorous and penetrating analysis are we able
to understand absolute truth, the true nature of all things and
phenomena. And only through our own Dharma practice can we
reveal the tenuousness and relativity hidden from their appearance
and realize the truly empty nature of all phenomena.

Generally speaking, our mundane mind tends to understand the
two truths as two separate, independent things, but actually they


                                                       88
are two aspects of a single reality. From seeing only relative truth,
we will eventually reach a profound certainty in the meaning
of absolute truth. From understanding and further realizing the
meaning of absolute truth, we will become more careful of our
actions, speeches and thoughts. Relative truth functions inexorably
within absolute truth. A thorough realization of the empty nature
of all phenomena has never led anyone to think that positive
actions do not bring happiness, or that negative actions do not
bring suﬀering. All phenomena appear from within emptiness as a
result of the coming together of illusory causes and conditions. The
inﬁnite display of phenomena can arise only because everything is
empty in nature. As Nagarjuna said:

   Only by things being empty,
   Can things be possible at all.

Padmasambhava also said, “Although my view is higher than
the sky, my attention to actions and their eﬀects is ﬁner than
ﬂour.” When our realization of emptiness becomes as vast as the
sky, we will gain an even greater conviction about the law of
cause and eﬀect, and we will see just how important our conduct
really is. Likewise, if we have a thorough understanding of the
way phenomena appear through dependent arising, it will not
be diﬃcult for us to understand the view of emptiness while


                                                       89
remaining in meditation. On arising from such a meditation, we
will recognize clearly the direct relationship between actions and
their results. This will enable us to discriminate easily between
positive and negative actions.

Once we realize the true nature of emptiness, our perception would
be simply like what Thogme Zangpo once said in a humble way,
“All the joys and suﬀerings of this world are just projections of
our minds and the result of our past karma. As I have a little
understanding that in relative truth everything is like an illusion,
and that in absolute truth everything is utterly beyond conceptual
fabrications, I don’t experience attachment and hatred at all.”

G2. The Emptiness of the Other Four Aggregates

   In the same way, feelings, perceptions, mental formations,
   and consciousness are also empty.

In the foregoing we provided a clear explanation of how the form
aggregate relates with emptiness. And so, if form is emptiness,
then the same reasoning follows for feelings, perceptions, mental
formations, and consciousness, for all aggregates can be refuted
by means of the analysis of form. It was not necessary to add extra
words here, therefore Avalokiteshvara just touches upon feelings,


                                                       90
perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness, by the phrase
“in the same way”.

At the outset, the Buddha skillfully leads us to analyze form, as we
understand that the essence of form is emptiness, we then easily
know the principle that the essence of all things is also emptiness. In
an eloquent manner, and with the easiest of examples, the Buddha
thus awakens us, and leads us to understand the deepest principles
without any diﬃculty. This shows the Buddha’s peculiarity, the
symbol of his wisdom of supreme awakening.

In sum, to expand what the sutra says above, it would say:

Feeling is emptiness, emptiness is feeling, feeling is not other than
emptiness, emptiness is not other than feeling;

Perception is emptiness, emptiness is perception, perception is not
other than emptiness, emptiness is not other than perception;

Mental formation is emptiness, emptiness is mental formations,
mental formation is not other than emptiness, emptiness is not
other than mental formation;

Consciousness is emptiness, emptiness is consciousness, conscious-
ness is not other than emptiness, emptiness is not other than
consciousness.


                                                       91
F2. The Sevenfold Profundity

   Therefore, Shariputra, all phenomena are emptiness, that
   is, with no characteristics, no production, no cessation, no
   stains, no purity, no increase, no decrease.

The Sevenfold Profundity

The Tibetan and the Chinese versions of this passage are diﬀerent
in some respects. In the Tibetan version, it is eight profundities
that are beyond all conceptual elaborations: (1) emptiness, (2) no
characteristics, (3) no production, (4) no cessation, (5) no stains,
(6) no purity, (7) no increase, and (8) no decrease. Yet several
Chinese translations only mention seven profundities. For this
reason, Khenpo Sodargye explained this teaching as the sevenfold
profundity, in which, the ﬁrst and second is combined as one, the
emptiness of characteristics.

1 The Emptiness of Characteristics

This means that not only are all things empty of inherent nature,
but also their very characteristics are emptiness. Like in the Dia-
mond Sutra it is said, “All appearances are illusory.” Ordinary living
beings believe that all appearance, such as sound, form or taste,
possess essential characteristics that are pleasant to hear, beautiful
to behold, and delicious to taste, and that such characteristics


                                                       92
are truly existent, so they strongly cling to such characters. On
the surface everything has characteristics, such as men, women,
mountains, rivers, and planet, each and every thing has its own
characteristic way of appearing. But indeed, this is a mere des-
ignation, fabricated by a conceptual thought. If we understand
this point, we will easily understand that a subject, that is, the
apprehender of characteristics, is also nonexistent. Thus, we will
ascertain the fundamental entity of all things as emptiness.

2 No Production and No Cessation

On the surface, all things possess the appearance of being pro-
duced by the gathering of causes and conditions. For example,
the production of the new sprouts in the spring; the production
of fresh, blooming ﬂowers and lush vegetation in the summer;
the production of ripe fruit and the leaves turning red in the fall;
the production of the pure, white snow in the winter, etc. Indeed,
the productions of all these things only belong to the illusion of
the ordinary people, because ultimately speaking, there is no real
production.

Some may wonder, “Is not everything continually being produced
and ceasing?” Indeed, these appearances are merely posited on
a conventional level. When we engage genuine observation, such
production cannot have a real existence. For example, if the causal


                                                       93
element exists at a former time, then the eﬀect element will exist at
a later time. Consequently, at the very time when the result element
is produced, the causal element will have ceased. Therefore, it is
not established that eﬀects are produced from causes. If causes and
eﬀects are established simultaneously, we then incur in the fault
of limitless production. Hence, what we refer to as production is
fundamentally nonexistent.

Since the production of all things, is nonexistent, then abiding in
the middle, and cessation in the end, cannot exist either. From
this, we can understand that all things are indeed nonexistence.
The three characteristics of production, abiding, and cessation, are
only ascertained from the conventional perspective of conditioned
things.

3 No Stains and No Purity

The term “stains” means deﬁlement, that is, belonging to samsara.
On a ﬁrst glance, samsara exists. Each of the living beings of the
six realms of samsara, together with the suﬀering they experience,
their modes of subsistence and their environments, are existent.
However, if we observe things in detail, the six realms of samsara
are nothing but the deluded appearances of sentient beings. The
term “purity” refers to nirvana. Prior to analysis, nirvana does exist.
Again, when ascertained from the perspective of its fundamental


                                                       94
entity, nirvana is also nonexistent. Hence, both samsara, which is
deﬁled, and nirvana, which is pure and free from deﬁlement, are
nonexistent.

4 No Increase and No Decrease

From the perspective of the resultant state, these two terms convey
that ultimate reality has no real existence. From the perspective of
samsara, they illustrate that both the increase of aﬄictions and the
decrease of merit are nonexistent. From the perspective of nirvana,
they illustrate that both the increase of merit and the decrease of
aﬄictions and obstructions are nonexistent.

In general, as long as living beings remain on the level of the
unawakened, aﬄictions and obstructions such as desire, hatred,
and ignorance, will increase in their mental continuum, while
virtues such as great compassion, the wisdom of non-duality, and
the mind of awakening, will diminish. As they gradually approach
Buddhahood, both the aﬄictive obstructions and the obstructions
to omniscience will gradually decrease and become eventually
destroyed, while the uncommon, ocean-like virtues of a buddha
will increase evermore.

However, this explanation is conﬁned to the mere perspective
of the appearing aspect. If we engage the perspective of the real
aspect of all things, increase and decrease turn out to be merely our

                                                       95
conceptual thoughts. In reality, there is absolutely neither increase
nor decrease. Just like a great ocean, where the waves rise and fall
without increasing or decreasing the level of water in the ocean,
when living beings become buddhas, their virtues will not expand,
and when they are not buddhas yet, their virtues will not diminish.
In this way, there is nothing to increase or decrease.

All buddhas and bodhisattvas have had a personal realization
of the truth concerning the emptiness of characteristics of all
things, free from conceptual elaboration. Therefore, the bodhisattva
Avalokiteshvara can convey its profound meaning to Shariputra. As
beginners in the study of the Prajnaparamita, we should understand
the profound meaning of these teachings. We should not have blind
faith in them with a lack of understanding, neither be dubious
about them for no good reason. Instead, having heard the teachings
on emptiness, we should try to gain personal experience through
listening, reﬂection, and meditation.

In the foregoing, we have ascertained the subject matter of the
foundational, or natural, Prajnaparamita.


                                                       96
The Path Prajnaparamita


E2. The Path Prajnaparamita
F1. Determine the Nature of the Five Aggregates as Emptiness

   Therefore, Shariputra, in emptiness there is no form, no
   feelings, no perceptions, no mental formations, and no
   consciousness.

Therefore: According the analysis of the natural or foundational
Prajnaparamita, we can understand that the ﬁve aggregates, which
include all the conditioned phenomena, do not truly exist. All
the unconditioned phenomena do not exist either, for they are
just conceptions based on the conditioned phenomena. So all the
knowable things are by nature empty, and from here, we can easily
understand that twelve sense bases, eighteen elements, twelve
links of dependent origination, as well as four noble truths do not
truly exist, too.


                                                       97
[...] in emptiness there is no form, no feelings, no perceptions, no
mental formations, and no consciousness.

As we’ve understood that form is emptiness and emptiness is
form, so within emptiness, there’re no forms truly existing with an
essential entity. Likewise, within emptiness, there’re no feelings,
perceptions, mental formations, or consciousness truly existing
with an essential entity.

Some may wonder, in the previous text, it is already said that feel-
ings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness are empty,
why is it repeated here one more time? As we can see, according
to the textual outline, the previous sentence is the determination
from the perspective of the foundational Prajnaparamita, and here
it is analyzed from the perspective of the path Prajnaparamita.

Then in the part of the path Prajnaparamita, why did the Buddha
ﬁrst ascertain the empty nature of ﬁve aggregates? It is because
every living being’s ﬁve aggregates are formed by his or her
own solid habitual tendency, and living beings have the strongest
attachment to their own aggregates. This is the most diﬃcult part
to be abandoned. If living beings are able to realize the nature of
ﬁve aggregates, then they won’t have any strong attachment to the
other phenomena.


                                                       98
F2. Determine the Nature of the Twelve Sense Bases as
   Emptiness

   There is no eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no body and
   no mind. There is no form, no sound, no smell, no taste, no
   texture, or mental objects.

The twelve sense bases include two sets of six: six sense organs,
or internal sense bases, which are eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,
mind, and six sense objects, or external sense bases, which are
form, sound, smell, taste, texture, and mental objects. The literal
meaning of sense bases in Tibetan or in Chinese is to take birth,
to erupt. This is because the six consciousnesses are completely
latent, or inactive, unless erupted through the contact of six sense
organs with their corresponding six objects.

For instance, when an ear and sound are present, the associated
consciousness arises. The arising of these three elements—ear,
sound and ear consciousness—lead to what is known as contact,
which in turn causes a pleasant or unpleasant or neutral feeling to
arise. It is from such a feeling that craving or aversion arises.

Based on these six pairs of sense bases, a number of mental factors
arise. If we can understand clearly the relationship between these
six pairs, or how consciousness depends upon contact with its


                                                       99
objects, then we are no longer ignorant and confused about the
relationship between the external and the internal.

Relatively speaking, there are six external bases and six internal
bases in our phenomenal world; ultimately speaking, however,
through the rigorous observation of their nature, they are empty.
For example, when we hear a sound, we may feel either pleasant
or unpleasant or neutral; but when we analyze its production, its
abiding and its cessation, we cannot ﬁnd an essential entity of this
phenomenon, and the quality of being pleasant or unpleasant only
depends on observers, and diﬀerent people have diﬀerent feeling
on it.

F3. Determine the Nature of the Eighteen Elements as Emptiness

   There is no eye-element, up to and including no element of
   mental consciousness.

Here element means seed, something very fundamental which
bears its own nature and has its own type of potential. The eighteen
elements are nothing but twelve sense bases plus their correspond-
ing six resultant consciousnesses, which arise out of the contact
between the six sense organs and their corresponding six objects.
They describe the participating factors in perception: subject and
object, and in between, which form three sets of six each. The three


                                                       100
sets are labelled the outer elements, inner elements, and secret
elements, and their respective six subdivisions all correspond to
the six diﬀerent senses.

The six outer elements relating to external things correspond to
the six objects of form, sound, smell, taste, touch, and mind. The
six inner elements are related to the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body,
and mind organs. They are composed of both mind and matter,
and therefore are positioned between the subject (secret) and the
object (outer) elements.

It is important to note that the sense organ itself is diﬀerent from the
sense consciousness. The organ merely supports its corresponding
consciousness. For example, when we say “the eye sees”, we are
not being entirely correct. It is our eye consciousness, not the organ,
which is doing the seeing.


                                                       101
If we understand the empty nature of twelve sense bases, which
means the six sense organs do not exist, and their objects, the
six external bases do not exist either, then consequently, the six
resultant consciousnesses that are formed through the contact of
six sense organs and their corresponding objects do not exist too.
Therefore, ultimately speaking, there’re no eighteen elements.

The non-existence of the eighteen elements does not deny their
appearance in front of us ordinary beings. However, at this very
moment they appear, their nature are empty, and emptiness is
exactly the nature of their appearance. In other words, we cannot
ﬁnd this so called emptiness somewhere else besides appearance,
and neither can we ﬁnd appearance besides emptiness. Emptiness
and appearance are in perfect union, appearance is not other than
emptiness, and emptiness is not other than appearance.

Therefore, the non-existence of ﬁve aggregates, twelve sense bases,
or eighteen elements is not the ultimate meaning of the Heart
Sutra, because it is just one of the four extremes. It is called similar
emptiness, because it’s closer to the ultimate meaning of emptiness,
and especially for those living beings who have very strong habitual
tendency of clinging, non-existence can be the best starting point
to understand the meaning of emptiness. Eventually, we need to
break through all the four extremes of our conceptual thought.


                                                       102
The ultimate meaning of the Heart Sutra is the perfect union of
emptiness and appearance. Just like within a dream, there are all
kinds of vivid appearances, however, those appearances are just
illusions and once waking up from the dream, everything is gone
and it is so obvious that none of those appearances possesses an
essential and solid entity. Likewise, all the manifestations within
samsara only possess the true nature of emptiness, and within
emptiness there’re all kinds of appearances; once waking up from
our own illusion, we will realize that the appearances within
samsara do not possess any essential entity, and we cannot ﬁnd
any trace of true existence.

F4. Determine the Nature of the Twelve Links of Dependent
   Origination as Emptiness

   There is no ignorance, and there is no extinction of igno-
   rance, up to and including no aging and death, and no ex-
   tinction of aging and death.

This sentence refers to the twelve links of dependent origination in
the chain of causation. It is a summary in accordance with their
sequence of evolution within the chain of samsaric existence, by
which all the ﬁve aggregates, twelve sense bases, and eighteen
elements interact to keep sentient beings bound in the cycle of
samsaric existence, a cycle of suﬀering. Although just two are


                                                       103
mentioned speciﬁcally, the phrase “up to and including” actually
includes all the twelve links, which are, ignorance, karmic forma-
tions, consciousness, name and form, six senses, contact, feelings,
craving, clinging, becoming, birth, and aging and death.

As the Buddha taught us, there are outer dependent origination
and inner dependent origination. The former states that a seed
produces its sprout, which gives rise to the stem, and consequently,
the stalk, the fruit, and the leaves. Just as a tree comes into being
under various causes and conditions, so too does everything. This
is called outer dependent origination.

What is more important for us is inner dependent origination,
which manifests the way that every sentient being wanders in
samsara in diﬀerent living forms. A human being in this life may
become an animal in the afterlife, and then turn into a heavenly
being in the next one. Before achieving liberation, reincarnation
from life to life will continue. Such a life process can be well under-
stood by following the teaching of the twelve links of dependent
origination. If we don’t understand these twelve links, we cannot
fully understand the reality of reincarnation, nor can we generate
true compassion toward others.


                                                       104
The Cycle of the Twelve Links of Dependent
Origination

In this cycle of samsaric existence, the ﬁrst point that we should
know is ignorance, and it is the root cause of samsara. Ignorance
can be indicated by self-attachment, that is to say, every living
being clings to “I” and “what I have”, which is the root cause
of samsara. So ignorance is the ﬁrst link of the twelve links of
dependent origination. Or sometimes we can directly say that
ignorance refers to a mental state that we are ignorant to the truth.
Being ignorant and deluded, one can’t see the truth and just ends
up with wrong actions. That is, driven by self-attachment, one
will create all kinds of good and bad karma through body, speech
and mind. This is the second link of the twelve, called karmic
formation. We may not exactly be aware of ignorance and karmic
formation in this life, but they were generated in the past lives and
are the causes that drive us to come to this world in this present
life.

Karmic formation gives rise to consciousness, the third link, which
carries all good and bad karma. Consciousness continuously exists
life after life. Unlike the body, which rots away completely after
death, consciousness keeps going on by taking diﬀerent living
forms. For example, in the bardo stage, there’s only consciousness


                                                       105
and no physical body, and due to the previous karma, conscious-
ness will perceive diﬀerent scenarios and choose the pleasant one
to be its destination, where the consciousness is bound with a
physical body and starts its next life.

If it is viviparity, consciousness will descend into a womb and
gives rise to name and form, the fourth link of the twelve. “Name”
refers to the four aggregates of feelings, perception, formation and
consciousness. “Form” is the aggregate of forms and refers to the
physical body before it takes shape. Starting from consciousness,
they are the eﬀects of the chain in the present life.

The ﬁfth one is called “six sense bases”, which means that after
consciousness is linked to a womb, the six sense organs, namely,
eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind will gradually take shape
inside the womb. So the ﬁfth factor is called “six sense bases”, or
“six sense gates”.

The coming together of six sense organs, six objects, and six
corresponding consciousnesses is called contact, and it is the
sixth link of the twelve. Six objects include forms, sounds, smells,
tastes, texture, and mental objects. The seventh link is feelings,
resulting from the contact of sense organs and their respective
objects. Feelings describes three diﬀerent mental states. Toward
favorable objects, one has pleasant feelings. Toward unfavorable


                                                       106
objects, one has unpleasant feelings. And toward neither favorable
nor unfavorable objects, one has neutral feelings, which is actually
a mental state of ignorance.

These ﬁve links result from the causes generated in the past lives
and are the eﬀects of this present life. They consequently lead
to the next three: craving, clinging, and becoming, which also
belong to this life. Craving, the eighth link, means that one is
eager to experience pleasant feelings and unwilling to experience
unpleasant ones, which involves desire, aversion and ignorance.
Craving plays a role equivalent to the ﬁrst link, ignorance, and
further develops into clinging, which means actively striving for
what is pleasurable and avoiding what is painful. This is the ninth
link, equivalent to the second link of karmic formation. Craving
and clinging lead to the tenth link of becoming and all three are
the causes of the next life, which means one acts with body, speech
and mind in the present life and creates the karma that determines
one’s next birth, the eleventh link of the twelve.

No matter whether one is reborn as a human or other sentient
being and no matter where one is reborn, birth is always followed
by aging and death, the twelfth link. Each of us is destined to age
and what we are doing now is conditioning and forming the next
life. It keeps going on and on, and the wheel of life will never stop
until we attain liberation.

                                                       107
The Meaning of the Twelve Links of Dependent
Origination

The twelve links of dependent origination explain the whole
procedure of living beings taking birth and rebirth in the endless
cycle of reincarnation. From the perspective of life, they include past
lives, present life and future lives. Ignorance and karmic formation
were caused in past lives, and they produced consciousness, name
and form, six senses, contact, feelings in present life; again the
next three links in the present life, craving, clinging, and becoming
act as the causes of birth, aging and death in future lives. So
brieﬂy speaking, the karma accumulated in past lives is the cause
of the manifestation of the present life, and in turn the karma
accumulated in the present life is the cause of taking rebirth in
future lives. This is exactly the karmic law of causes and eﬀects.

The twelve links can be classiﬁed into three groups, aﬄictions,
karma and suﬀering. Ignorance, craving and clinging belong to
aﬄictions; karmic formation and becoming belong to karma; and
consciousness, name and form, six senses, contact, feelings, birth,
and aging and death all belong to suﬀering. Due to aﬄictions
one accumulates karma, and due to karma one has to experience
suﬀerings; while going through suﬀerings, one again generates
aﬄictions and further accumulates karma. The whole procedure is
such an endless cycle, and the main cause of this cycle is ignorance.

                                                       108
If we are able to get rid of our ignorance and have the wisdom
to see the truth, then we won’t crave and cling to these deluded
phenomena and eventually break free from the cycle of samsaric
existence.
The True Nature of the Twelve Links of
Dependent Origination

Generally speaking, the twelve links have the sequence of the
evolution of samsara, as well as the sequence of attaining nirvana.
Although both the process for taking birth in the cycle of existence
and the process of gaining freedom from it do exist on the relative
level, they do not exist on the ultimate level. Furthermore, since they
do not exist on the ultimate level, their corresponding extinctions,
or non-existence, do not exist either.

For example, ignorance, the ﬁrst link of the twelve, is just a mental
state that is lack of wisdom to see the truth. If we observe its
entity, its origination or its cessation, we just end up with nothing.
Sometimes ignorance is described as darkness. By turning on
the light, the darkness in a house is immediately dispelled, even
though the house had remained dark for a thousand years. But
if we try to search how the darkness was produced, and where
it’s gone, we can get nothing. Darkness is just a temporary state
of the house, and has neither birth nor cessation. Or if darkness


                                                       109
really had an essential entity, then there’s no way to dispel it. The
same goes to ignorance. It has no essential entity, and only has a
nature of emptiness. Since the existence of ignorance is empty, the
extinction of ignorance is also empty. That is why in the text, it is
said that there’s no ignorance, and no extinction of ignorance.

The main purpose of the teaching in the Heart Sutra is to destroy
our self-attachment. It is our self-attachment that prevents us from
seeing the truth. If we can get rid of self-attachment, we are no
longer ignorant, and then in turn, without ignorance, we can clearly
perceive the true nature of all the deluded phenomena in samsara
and won’t be bound in the cycle of suﬀering. So destroying our
self-attachment is the only way to be free from samsara, and the
direct antidote to self-attachment is the wisdom of emptiness. This
is why the reﬂection and meditation on the teaching of emptiness
are so essential for Dharma practitioners who seek the ultimate
freedom of liberation.


                                                       110
F5. Determine the Nature of the Four Noble Truths as Emptiness

   There is no suﬀering, no origin, no cessation, no path, [...]

The Four Noble Truths

Here is the negation of the main theme of ﬁrst turning of the
Dharma wheel, the four noble truths, which are, the truth of
suﬀering, the truth of its origin, the truth of its cessation, and the
truth of the path to its cessation.

First, our present situation, the life in cyclic existence, is suﬀering,
which needs to be understood. Second, suﬀering has its own root
causes, which are karma and aﬄictions, which need to be aban-
doned. Third, there is a state free from suﬀering which is nirvana,
the cessation of suﬀering, that can be actualized. And fourth, there
is a path to get there, which needs to be relied upon.

The four truths are the basic foundation of all the Buddha’s teach-
ings. They can be divided into two pairs of cause and eﬀect, known
as the cause and eﬀect of samsara, thorough aﬄiction, and the
cause and eﬀect of nirvana, complete puriﬁcation.

1 The Truth of Suﬀering

The ﬁrst noble truth is about the real situation of our life in cyclic
existence, and it is the result of samsara. In order to practice the


                                                       111
path, we must have a clear understanding of suﬀering that pervades
all existence, either sentient or insentient.

Though we all admit to experiencing sadness and pain in our
lives, it takes further examination for most of us to perceive the
more subtle modes of suﬀering that shadow even the happiest
occasion. In Buddhist teaching, suﬀering means unsatisfactory,
impermanent, illusive and not controllable. There are three types of
suﬀering, the suﬀering upon suﬀering, the suﬀering of change and
all-pervasive suﬀering of being conditioned. In desire realm, living
beings experience all the three types of suﬀering; in form realm,
mainly there are the suﬀering of change and all-pervasive suﬀering;
and in formless realm, mainly it’s all-pervasive suﬀering.

The suﬀering upon suﬀering includes all the miseries of the lower
realms, as well as the suﬀerings of birth, aging, sickness and death
in the higher realms, and also separation from loved ones, having
to encounter what is undesirable, and not achieving what we want
even after pursuing it.

As it is said, “What is the suﬀering upon suﬀering? It is that which is
painful when arising, painful when remaining, and pleasant when
changing.” All these suﬀerings, big or small, are undesirable from
the very ﬁrst moment they appear, and are therefore understood to


                                                       112
be painful. What’s more, there’s one suﬀering coming after another,
one being piled upon another. This is suﬀering upon suﬀering.

The suﬀering of change means that no matter where we ﬁnd
ourselves, and no matter how seemingly pleasurable and attractive
our dwelling place, physical body or sensory enjoyments, our
situation cannot possibly remain as it is, but is bound to change,
because of not being beyond the laws of impermanence.

When it does change, what was previously a pleasurable experience
becomes a source of suﬀering. As it is said, “The suﬀering of change
is that which is pleasant when arising, pleasant when remaining,
but painful when ceasing.”

The all-pervasive suﬀering of being conditioned refers to all experi-
ence that is bound up with the ﬁve aggregates. No matter whether
we are experiencing pleasure or suﬀering, or a neutral state, we
are always setting ourselves up for future suﬀering. Why? Because
our present aggregates are direct causes for our future aggregates,
which will be the supports for suﬀering in the future.

That means all our present experiences are in some way the causes
for suﬀerings that will come to us later on. As it is said, “The
suﬀering of being conditioned is not apparent when it arises,
remains or ceases, but it is still the cause of suﬀering.”


                                                       113
2 The Truth of the Origin of Suﬀering

The second noble truth is the cause of samsara, karma and af-
ﬂictions. Among aﬄictions, ignorance is the most essential one.
Suﬀering has karmic causes that we accumulate by our own ac-
tivities performed in ignorance. The twelve links of dependent
origination show us a clear picture of how we are driven by
ignorance and karma and bound in samsara.

3 The Truth of the Cessation of Suﬀering

Nevertheless, it is possible for us to be free from the cycle of
suﬀering and attain the ultimate peace. The cessation of suﬀering
is the third noble truth, the result of nirvana. It brings freedom
from suﬀering and the cause of suﬀering.

4 The Truth of the Path to the Cessation of Suﬀering

The cessation of suﬀering cannot be attained without any cause.
We do need to follow a path in order to achieve this goal. This is
the fourth noble truth, the path to the cessation of suﬀering, and it
is the cause of nirvana.

There’re many diﬀerent paths that bring about nirvana. For exam-
ple, in pure land tradition, we can chant the name of Amitabha; in
Chan tradition, we can observe our own mind through meditation;
in Vajrayana tradition, we can recognize the nature of mind with the

                                                       114
help of the enlightened master’s direct pointing. Although these
paths are diﬀerent, they share the same goal of achieving nirvana.
Diﬀerent practitioners have diﬀerent capacity and preference, so
they can choose diﬀerent paths to attain the same enlightenment.
The True Nature of the Four Noble Truths on the
Ultimate Level

On the relative level, the four noble truths really exist, and it is
necessary for us to understand them fully. However, on the ultimate
level, none of them exist. For example, if we believe nirvana as truly
existence, we fall upon the extreme of non-existence, while the
ultimate nirvana is the perfect union of emptiness and luminosity.
Also, the so called suﬀering does not have a standard measurement,
or a permanent and independent quality. It is just a deluded
feeling based on personal experience. Given the same situation,
some feel it is pleasant, while others feel it is painful. Diﬀerent
feelings only depend on the karmic formation of diﬀerent living
beings. Therefore, suﬀering does not have an intrinsic existence
that is independent and permanent. So the nature of suﬀering is
emptiness.

We can further understand the four noble truths by using the
metaphor of sickness. We can say that the ﬁrst noble truth diagnoses
a disease. If we want to cure this disease, we must ﬁnd out its cause,


                                                       115
the second noble truth. Once we know the cause, we would be
much happy to follow the prescription and to receive the treatment.
The Buddha is the doctor who diagnoses the disease and prescribes
the medicine. The fourth noble truth, the Dharma path is exactly
the medicine that we need to take to cure the disease. By taking
the medicine, it will eventually bring us to the state of complete
health, nirvana, the third noble truth of cessation.

Before we are cured, we have to take the medicine, so all the four
noble truths are existent in our spiritual practice. After we are
cured, the sickness is completely gone and there’s no need for us
to keep receiving the treatment. We needn’t cling to the path and
the recovery state any more. So ultimately speaking, the four noble
truths don’t exist with essential entities.


                                                       116
The Resultant Prajnaparamita


E3. The Resultant Prajnaparamita

   [...] no wisdom, no attainment, and there is also no non-
   attainment.

Now we’re talking about the resultant Prajnaparamita. Here attain-
ment is referred to the fruits that are attained by hearers, solitary
realizers, bodhisattvas, and buddhas. On relative level, there are
wisdom  that we can attain, and the process of such attainment
does exist. However, on ultimate level, both wisdom and attain-
ment do not exist, and they are only manifested in an illusory and
dream-like way. So the resultant state of Prajnaparamita is itself
empty of intrinsic existence.

Relatively speaking, the fruit and the person who seek for the fruit
do exist. Without rigorous observation, we can easily say that there
is such procedure of seeking for the wisdom and merit. However,
in the perception of those enlightened beings who abide in the

                                                       117
realization of emptiness, there is no wisdom and no attainment.
Like in the Diamond Sutra, it is said that in reality, there is no such a
thing called “arhat”, and if an arhat should give rise to the thought,
“I have attained the realization of the arhat”, this means that he is
attached to the notions of a self, and he is not an arhat.

In Vairocana’s commentary, it is also said that because by nature,
all living beings are buddhas, so there’s no new wisdom that a
living being can attain after becoming a buddha. Or in other words,
we already possess the buddha’s vast and profound wisdom and
qualities in a perfect way, so there’s no new attainment needed any
more.

No non-attainment means that because there’s no attainment, so
the other corresponding extreme, non-attainment doesn’t exist
either. Or another way to understand it can be referred to the
relative truth, in which the paths and the resultant states of the
paths exist in a dream-like way.


                                                       118
The Merit and Fruit of the
Realization of Emptiness


D3. The Merit of the Realization of Emptiness

   Therefore, Shariputra, because they have no attainment, all
   bodhisattvas depend on the perfection of wisdom and abide
   in it. Their mind is unobstructed, so they have no fear, and
   having passed beyond error, they will enter into ﬁnal nir-
   vana.

Since bodhisattvas have no attainment, they rely on the perfection
of wisdom and abide in it and they don’t have any obscuration
in their minds. Here unobstructed means the mind has become
totally cleansed of all mental aﬄictions. When an individual goes
through a process of purifying the mind by applying the antidotes
to the mental aﬄictions, over time, the mind becomes totally
free of all these obscurations. Essentially speaking, only through
actualizing the empty nature of the mind can one clean away all


                                                       119
mental aﬄictions and attain liberation. As Nagarjuna explains in
his Fundamentals of the Middle Way, emptiness is both the means of
eliminating the mental aﬄictions and the resultant state that one
arrives at after having done so.

Having no obscuration in their minds, they have no fear. Fear is
resulted from our obscuration, our mental aﬄictions that mislead
us to consider everything as truly existence. According to some
great masters’ teaching in the Han tradition, there are ﬁve types of
fear, the fear of not well living, the fear of bad reputation, the fear
of death, the fear of taking rebirth in three lower realms, and the
fear of others’ power.

As long as we have self-attachment, we are concerned about gain
and loss, and such kind of concern generates fear in our minds.
Through the realization of emptiness, we can reach the state of
total equanimity in all situations. As a result, there is neither hope
nor fear, neither demons nor gods. This is the ultimate level of
fearlessness.

So overall speaking, the true way that we exist is the way the
reﬂection of the moon in water exists, and the true way we expe-
rience is the way the dreamer experiences. As we either struggle
through our dreams or enjoy them, we do so on the assumption
that what is happening is real and true in an absolute sense. But


                                                       120
it is true only from the context of that dream. When we awaken,
everything we have just experienced are just an illusion based on
emptiness. Likewise, we think we have awakened from a dream
into a more real “reality”, but in fact, as we pass from sleeping to
waking we have simply shifted from one dreamlike state to another.
Our waking perceptions are all merely the manifestation of mental
habitual tendency and karmic patterns accumulated over inﬁnite
lifetimes.

[...] having passed beyond error, they will enter into ﬁnal
nirvana.

And having utterly passed beyond error, one will reach the end of
nirvana. Here error means ordinary beings’ deluded perceptions
due to ignorance. For us deluded beings, we assume impermanence
as permanence, suﬀering as happiness, no-self as the existence
of self, and impurity as purity. All of these misunderstanding
are caused by our own ignorance. Driven by such erroneous
understanding, all living beings are trapped in samsara and have
to take rebirth in any of the six realms, and set oﬀ on an endless
journey of suﬀering.

Nirvana can be understood as the ultimate nature of one’s mind
that is completely free from all mental aﬄictions. There are natural
nirvana and resultant nirvana. Since all the aspects of one’s path


                                                       121
to enlightenment—one’s innate capacity to attain enlightenment
through the path, the path itself, and the results of the path to
enlightenment—are devoid of intrinsic existence, they all possess
natural nirvana.

Through cultivating insight into the nature of emptiness, one
will be able to dispel and overcome the suﬀerings resulting from
the erroneous understandings of things and phenomena that
result from fundamental ignorance. Not only can the suﬀerings
be removed, but even the propensity for self-grasping ignorance
and the imprints left by past ignorant actions can be removed.
Thus, one can completely eliminate ignorance in the present, the
imprints of it from the past, and the propensity toward ignorance
in the future. Transcending all ignorance, one naturally becomes
free of fear, and one abides in the ﬁnal nirvana of a buddha, which
is the resultant nirvana.

D4. The Fruit of the Realization of Emptiness

   All the buddhas of the three times have awakened to sup-
   reme, perfect, and complete enlightenment by depending
   on the perfection of wisdom.

Here the term three times refers to all buddhas throughout the
universe. Certainly in their own perception, there’re no such


                                                       122
conception of time and space, and the state of buddhahood is
beyond the conﬁnement of time and space. This term used here is
from the perspective of ordinary people’s perception, in order to
emphasize all buddhas.

The fruit of the realization of emptiness is the unsurpassable
buddhahood. Without fear or obscurations, without the slightest
concept about their meditative states, the buddhas of the past,
present, and future apply these Prajnaparamita practices and
realize perfect enlightenment. Not only ordinary living beings
and bodhisattvas need to solely rely on Prajnaparamita to achieve
nirvana, all the buddhas of the ten directions and three times
also manifested in this way to achieve the supreme, perfect, and
complete enlightenment. Therefore, Prajnaparamita is the only way
of becoming buddha, and each living being must follow this path
and depend on Prajnaparamita to break free from samsara, and
as a result, to attain the complete enlightenment and the ultimate
liberation.


                                                       123
The Mantra with Great
Blessings


D5. The Mantra with Great Blessings

   Therefore, one should know that the great mantra of the
   perfection of wisdom, the mantra of great knowledge, the
   supreme mantra, the mantra that is equal to the unequaled,
   is the mantra that paciﬁes all suﬀering, and it is true because
   it is not deceptive. The mantra of the perfection of wisdom
   was then stated:

   tadyatha gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha!

The perfection of wisdom itself, the Prajnaparamita, is here referred
to as the “great mantra”. The meaning of mantra is to protect the
mind or the mind stream. Thus, through attaining the perfection of
wisdom, one’s mind will be completely protected against erroneous
beliefs, against the mental aﬄictions that arise from such beliefs,


                                                       124
and against the suﬀering produced by the mental aﬄictions. It will
lead to the ultimate destination of enlightenment.

The perfection of wisdom is called the “mantra of great knowl-
edge” because thoroughly understanding its meaning eliminates
the three poisons of craving, hatred, and ignorance. It transforms
beginningless darkness into the state of great awareness.

It is called the “supreme mantra” because there is no greater
method than the perfection of wisdom for saving one from the
extremes of cyclic existence and the isolated peace of individual
nirvana.

It is called the mantra “equal to the unequalled” because the
Buddha’s enlightened state is unequalled. The state of buddhahood,
or the state of equanimity, is known as the state without equal,
and, through the deepest realization of this mantra, one attains a
state equal to that state.

Finally, the perfection of wisdom is known as the mantra that
“paciﬁes all suﬀering” because it calms all suﬀerings and also
removes all propensities for future suﬀering.

The perfection of wisdom is the ultimate truth, so “it is true”.
In the realm of the ultimate truth, there is no disparity between


                                                       125
appearance and reality, and thus this ultimate truth is “not decep-
tive”.

The mantra of the perfection of wisdom was then stated:
tadyatha gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha!

In Sanskrit, tadyatha literally means “it is thus” and prepares the
way for what follows; gate gate means “go, go”; paragate means
“go beyond”; parasamgate means “go totally beyond”; and bodhi
svaha can be read as “be rooted in the ground of enlightenment”.

Thus, the entire mantra itself can be translated as “go, go, go be-
yond, go totally beyond, be rooted in the ground of enlightenment”.
We can interpret this mantra metaphorically to read “go to the
other shore”, which is to say, abandon this shore of samsara, unen-
lightened existence, which has been our home since beginningless
time, and cross to the other shore of ﬁnal nirvana and complete
liberation.

Sometimes people may think that a mantra is just composed of cer-
tain types of syllables pronounced by human beings, and through
chanting this mantra, the corresponding deity will come to oﬀer
help through his miraculous power. Actually this is not the proper
view on mantra. Ultimately speaking, a mantra has no diﬀerence
with its deity, or in other words, a mantra is exactly the manifesta-
tion of the deity. For example, when we chant om mani padme hum,

                                                       126
this mantra is exactly the manifestation of Avalokiteshvara, and
they share the same entity.


                                                       127
Encourage to Learn and
Practice Prajnaparamita


D6. Encourage to Learn and Practice Prajnaparamita

   Shariputra, a bodhisattva, a great being, should train in the
   profound perfection of wisdom in this way.”

In Avalokiteshvara’s ﬁnal statement, he oﬀers encouragement
to Shariputra, as well as to all the followers of this sutra. All
bodhisattvas wishing to attain the full enlightenment must practice
according to the profound transcendent wisdom, which breaks
down all conceptual thoughts and ego-clinging in the ground of
samsara and nirvana.

It is quite essential that each of us who wish to achieve enlighten-
ment must engage in the practice of the Prajnaparamita. As taught
by the great bodhisattva Maitreya, there are three types of root
causes for attaining the path of seeing, or becoming a bodhisattva


                                                       128
who arrives the ﬁrst bhumi. They are: 1) giving the teaching of the
Prajnaparamita to others; 2) helping others to achieve the realiza-
tion of the Prajnaparamita; 3) engaging in the meditation practice
of the Prajnaparamita. All of these three root causes will generate
incredible merit and lead practitioners to achieve the realization of
the Prajnaparamita.


                                                       129
Dispel Doubt through the
Buddha’s Affirmation


B2. Dispel Doubt through the Buddha’s Aﬃrmation

   At that time, the Exalted One emerged from that concentra-
   tion and said to Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva, the great
   being: “Well done, well done, son of noble qualities, it is just
   so; it should be just so. The perfection of wisdom should be
   practiced just as you said. The tathagatas will also rejoice in
   this.”

The Buddha, arising from his samadhi, expresses his own appre-
ciation for the ﬂawless eﬀorts of Avalokiteshvara and Shariputra.
Up to this point, the Buddha has been deeply immersed in med-
itative absorption on the apprehension of the profound. During
his meditation, the Buddha inspires Avalokiteshvara and Sharipu-
tra to engage in the foregoing dialogue. When their dialogue is
concluded, the Buddha commends and aﬃrms Avalokiteshvara’s


                                                       130
expression. Here the Buddha reveals that he was both aware
of and participating in all the aspects of their dialogue. At the
Buddha’s level, there is no distinction between meditative and
post-meditative states. This aﬃrmation indicates that Buddha’s
meditative absorption is in fact a fusion of both deep meditative
concentration on emptiness—ultimate truth, and full awareness of
the world of phenomena continually unfolding—relative truth.

So why does the Buddha need to aﬃrm this dialogue? According
to some commentaries, there are three reasons. The ﬁrst one is
to dispel the doubt of Shariputra, because he may wonder if he
brought up a proper question; the second one is to dispel the doubt
of Avalokiteshvara, because he may wonder if he answered the
question in a proper way; and the third one is to dispel the doubts
of the audience, because they may also wonder if the dialogue
between Avalokiteshvara and Shariputra is a proper teaching on
the Prajnaparamita. With the Buddha’s aﬃrmation in the end of
the sutra, all of these doubts are completely dispelled, and the
audience understand that this dialogue really has no diﬀerence
with the teaching given by the Buddha himself.

The tathagatas will also rejoice in this.


                                                       131
The Buddha also oﬀers the praise and encouragement of all bud-
dhas of the three times and ten directions for all those endeavoring
to practice the Prajnaparamita.


                                                       132
Praise and Rejoice
Praise and Rejoice


A3. Praise and Rejoice

   Then, having the Buddha spoken these words, the venera-
   ble Shariputra and the bodhisattva, the great being, the no-
   ble Avalokiteshvara, with all beings of the world including
   gods, humans, asuras and gandharvas, heard the Buddha’s
   discourse with great joy, received it with conviction, and
   promised to engage in practice.

In the end it is universal rejoicing in the Buddha’s profound
teaching. As we can see, within the assembly, there are gods,
humans, asuras, gandharvas and numerous living beings in the
world. This essential teaching beneﬁts all beings without exception
and all beings are considered equal by the Buddha. It is because
all beings equally possess buddha nature, a precious treasure as
yet undiscovered, which they can ﬁnally recognize by cultivating
wisdom and compassion on the path. This is cause for rejoicing.


                                                       134
The last sentence, “received it with conviction, and promised
to engage in practice”, shows us the right path to follow the
teaching. First, we need to receive the teaching through listening
and reﬂecting, during which stage we should be able to dispel all
our ignorance, wrong views and doubts regarding the teaching
and develop sincere conviction to the teaching. Second, based on
such conviction, we need to put this teaching into practice through
meditation and eventually realize the teaching on our own, which
is the ultimate goal of the path.


                                                       135
                   Dedication

May the merit resulting from this piece of work contribute
in the greatest possible measure to the long life of all great
masters, to the ﬂourishing of the Buddha Dharma, and to
           the welfare of all sentient beings.
It is always our wish to present a work of the highest quality to the
readers so that anyone who reads this text would ﬁnd inspiration.
So we would very much appreciate your comments, feedback or
suggestions for how this text might be improved and made more
 valuable. You are also greatly welcomed if you want to make a
     contribution to any of our other projects of translation.
       Please email us at: translation@khenposodargye.org
